inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #0 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Wed 4 Jan 06 10:27

    
How is the world this year?

Bruce Sterling (he of the Dead Media Project, Wired magazine, Veridian
Design, and many successful novels and lectures) returns to discuss it with
us. Here, again, to lead the conversation is Jon Lebkowsky (like Bruce, a
member of The Well, Jon's a techno-culture-focused writer, activist, and
consultant).

What are the issues, gents? Anything *really* new and different about the
year gone by? What to expect in the year ahead?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #1 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 06 12:18

    
I'm still in shock, recovering from 2005. I'm tempted to rail about
disasters of biblical proportions, but I fear the various flavors of
fundamentalist will assume a rationale for apocalyptic acts of
destruction.

Bruce, you spent the year teaching design. How did that effect your
perception of the various earthquakes, hurricanes, wars, famines,
plagues, etc.?  Can we design our way out of this mess?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #2 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 06 16:37

    
I know it's spooky, but this isn't anything compared to what's coming
down the pike.  

Yeah, I spent a year teaching design.  The top issue in the industrial
design field is that everything "industrial" is going to China.  This
isn't brute labor these Chinese are up to; basically, they're working
their way out of Communism.  

This  new industrial revolution the Chinese
are having dwarfs anything the Chinese have ever done before.  The
transformation is swift and colossal.    If you're in shock, imagine
them.
Imagine being some minor-league peasant apparatchik in China whose
family tilled the same patch of soil for the past 3000 years.
And then your son comes home and demands broadband
so he can play Korean wargames.  Huh?

But the Chinese aren't freaking out about it; they're not
wringing their hands, declaring war on abstract nouns,
succumbing to fundamentalist bullshit, 
or telling everybody that the Chinese way of life
is not up for negotiation.  Basically, they're just getting
on with the necessary work at hand.  They've
always been a cauldron of toil.  Now they're
getting paid!  Who wouldn't go for that?

They're not "designing their way out of the mess."  Basically,
they're doing it the Deng Xiaoping way, which is "crossing the river
by feeling the rocks with your feet."  That doesn't make the
change any less profound, though.  2005 was a crap year
for the US, but China and India are off their knees and
on their feet.  In the global perspective, that's a big deal.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #3 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 06 18:59

    
So once they're on their feet, do they bury us? Or do they buy us?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #4 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 06 19:13

    

I guess those prospects are mighty exciting, but what if the Chinese
just
go about their own booming business?  Do they HAVE to buy or bury
anybody?  And even if they do, isn't Siberia just sort of sitting
there?

Maybe they buy or bury South Korea.  Check out this NYT piece
on the huge Chinese appetite for South Korean hiphop.
The fact that there is South Korean hiphop is wack enough,
but imagine a vast China enthralled with Korean hiphop!
Do they have to buy or bury any American hiphop?
Heck no, man. They become the planetary
hiphop majority by force of numbers.

 They can just sublimely ignore
American hiphop, just like the US  government does.


http://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/02/international/asia/02korea.html?hp&ex=113617
8000&en=f06cacf38dc8f861&ei=5094&partner=homepage
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #5 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 06 22:27

    
I was thinking metaphorically, that they would bury us by marginalizing our 
economy. Developing nations also have an edge, because they can leapfrog over 
industrial dinosaurs; this is South Korea's real power, so I'm told. On the 
other hand, I was talking to someone today about collaborative economies - 
thinking about moving away from competition with other nations, in favor of 
collaboration. I suppose that sounds subversive at the moment, to those who 
feel that competition is still possible.

So maybe the hiphop we all listen to is created collaboratively, via the web,
by djs in Korea, China, and East L.A.?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #6 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 06 06:52

    
Well, much as I appreciate Chinese manufacturing excellence, I don't
think they'll be "burying" anybody till they've got some Chinese
soft-power...
global-scale Chinese music, film, anime, Beijing consensus diplomacy,
 that kind of thing.

When and if people start getting "Sino-ized" rather than
"Westernized,"
that'll be a big deal.  I just don't expect to see that happening.
I think we are well past that epoch.

We're all in the same global stew now.  Koreans exporting
black American music to China?  Hey, if you're looking for
Confucian cultural purity, game over.

I'm  quite the Sinophile. I think what they've done in the past
20 years is a near-miracle.  If you'd gone back 20 years ago and
asked American diplomats for their top-end positive China scenario,
it likely would have been something like this situation today.

So if we're getting what we want from them, why are we bitching?
Do we miss those glamorous Great Leap Forward days when
starved corpses were floating down their rivers?  Have they
failed to brandish enough hydrogen bombs at us lately?
Do we miss the sweet accommodations of the Gang of Four?

Our economy really needs some 'marginalizing.'  The old economy
is not sustainable and is dangerous to us and to everyone
we know.  We shouldn't cling to yesterday's methods. The  American
competitive
advantage is the proven and repeated ability to invent 
new economies.

We Americans suck at surrounding the oil wells with land-mines and
demanding a check on everybody's papers.  That strategy
doesn't play to our strengths.

Over in Europe, a bunch of quarrelsome states moved away
from their attempted burials into collaboration.  Did Germany "bury"
Belgium lately?  Did France "bury" Spain?  No.  You just wander
around throwing Euros at people. The Greeks aren't
sobbing into their Danish beer about being crushed
by the international competition.

This isn't a "Chinese century," or anything so corny and fearsome.
The Chinese have got maybe 25, 30 lively years in the sun
before they run into the weirdest demographic problems
on the planet.  That doesn't even count their restive
land-empire and the pervasive corruption problems  they
have.  We ought to be crossing our fingers for the
Chinese people, rather than sitting in some neocon bunker
plotting their demise.

I already saw this handwringing playbook, back when Japan
was booming in the 80s.  Did we all die because
Japan boomed?  Do we hate them forever?  It's a non-issue.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #7 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 06 08:18

    
I think Americans who worry about China's potential domination of
markets are really concerned about he economic decline of the USA.
China is a convenient target for their anxieties, easier to grasp than
complex global forces that go bump in the night. Developing nations are
doing just that, developing; more slices of the world pie, less room
for dominant forces.  Are we in transition from a world dominated by
superpowers to a world of networks and markets, a p2p world where
hierarchies have crumbled? Is the violence and confusion we see today
symptomatic of a struggle to retain concentrations of power and money
that are inherently doomed by global structural evolution?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #8 of 129: Sofia's Choice (amicus) Thu 5 Jan 06 11:05

    

I think it's absolutely hysterical that Chinese kids are making money
working up low-level characters in virtual worlds to sell to Americans. The
happier analog to teen girls and boys undressing in front of web cams, which
I think I predicted (not that I was the first) back in 1990 or so ("Polly
Jean Amour and SeeYouDoMe").
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #9 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Thu 5 Jan 06 11:55

    
Which way does the surveillance backlash go, Bruce? More state power, or
less, and with what results?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #10 of 129: Dan Mitchell (mitchell) Thu 5 Jan 06 12:02

    
Bruce: please say more about weird Chinese demographics.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #11 of 129: John Payne (satyr) Thu 5 Jan 06 12:02

    
> economic decline of the USA

Relative or absolute?

Looked at in relative terms, by how many times the income of the average
American worker exceeds that of the average worker in whatever country
we're being compared to, their advancement is our decline -- but that way
lies nothing but madness.

Even the poorest of nations will eventually get on board the prosperity
train, as they become the last places to run to for cheap labor.  But,
aside from having to pay a little more for produce, some continued loss of
jobs to off-shore operations, and increased competition for non-renewable
commodities that are beginning to be in short supply, how does this hurt
us?  And, considering that increased incomes in places where people have
historically had trouble just feeding themselves translates to new markets,
the net effect might actually be positive.

We'd be well advised to helpful in finding ways for emerging economies to
be complementary with our own, rather than in direct competition with it,
and, as much as possible, to bypass dependency on the non-renewables to
which we are currently addicted.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #12 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 06 13:49

    
"Which way does the surveillance backlash go, Bruce? More state power,
or
less, and with what results?"

The hot-button here is always domestic spying for political advantage.
Nixon could have used all the Cuban refugees he wanted to spy
on Cubans inside the USA; but when he let them loose on the
Democrats, it meant his head.  It took a while, but the
state can't stand internal spying on the state.

Obviously it takes some state-power to run an outfit like
ECHELON, and In-Q-Tel is busily spreading the grant money
for tomorrow's Total Information Awareness system right now.
But I suspect that the "backlash" goes someplace pretty strange.

I'm thinking the future of surveillance belongs to partisan
blogger-mobs howling for blood.  You can see a guy
like Josh Marshall trying to start his own private-investigation
agency over at TALKING POINTS MEMO...  He's nickel-and-diming
it, but what if he had a few million?   A cat like
Abramoff has had the run of K Street for years now.
Nobody brought it up, nobody said a thing... 

If I were a spook from an unfriendly power and I wanted to
destabilize the American political system, I'd be
feeding the American poli-bloggers big chunks of fresh meat.
It wouldn't matter if it came from right or left.
Just as long as it was shocking, and not the sort
of thing the mainstream media saw fit to touch.
Blowjobs.  Gay White House reporters.  That sort of
thing.  

There's a major-league video sex scandal in 
Indian politics right now.  It's got rather little to do
with India per se and everything to do with how easy
it is for political operatives to videotape moral panics and
distribute them.
It is proving enough to wreck the major
opposition party in the biggest democracy in the world.
Pakistani intelligence couldn't have done a neater job,
and, you know, maybe they did. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #13 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 06 14:00

    
"Bruce: please say more about weird Chinese demographics."

Here's some stuff out of a British think-tank:

"As early as 2015, China's working age population will actually start
falling. By 2040, today's young workers will be pensioners - in fact
the world's second largest population, after India, will be Chinese
pensioners. (...)

"There could well be 100 million Chinese people aged over 80, more
than the current worldwide total, as Richard Jackson and Neil Howe
point out in their excellent paper, The Graying of the Middle Kingdom
(CSIS 2004). (...)

"Because of China's one-child policy there will be fewer new workers
under its so-called "4,2,1" population structure - four grandparents,
two parents and one child. This is a demographic transition that many
countries go through. But a process that is taking a century in the
west will take 40 years there. The desperate rush for economic growth
is fuelled by fears that China could grow old before it grows rich. 

"Not so long ago, China was one of the world's most youthful
countries, with a median age of 20. Its median age is now estimated at
33. By 2050, the United Nations forecasts, China's median age could be
45, against 43 for the UK and 41 for the US.

(((That's not the weird part - just getting old.  Every country's
doing that.
This is the weird part: the Chinese gender imbalance.)))

"Imposing the one-child policy on these long established customs is
having an extraordinary effect. If you can have only one child it
becomes highly desirable to have a boy. The rule is not as strictly
enforced as it was, but you can now see its effect on the second child,
which in the eyes of many Chinese really is the last chance to have a
boy. For every 100 female second children, there are 152 males.
Overall, there are now about 120 boys for every 100 girls in China.

"The country is waking up to this extraordinary imbalance. Last year
it banned ultrasound testing to try to stop gender-based abortion. But
already it means China is facing a world not unlike a traditional
Oxbridge college, with far too many men relative to women. That is why
we can already read in the media accounts of young women being bribed
or even kidnapped from places such as North Korea or Vietnam.  China is
going to have to attract large-scale female immigration or many of its
young men will leave."

(((I'm not sure that I buy the mass-migration theory, but there's
never been a society anywhere, ever, with that kind of age and
sex-ratio structure.   China forty years from now looks like a
lumberjack camp for geezers.  I wish 'em luck with that.)))
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #14 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Thu 5 Jan 06 14:08

    
i had a chance conversation with a young chinese guy while spending too many
hours in an airport a few months ago. he'd come to the U.S. to visit family
members and was headed back. he is studying industrial design in peking.

i said something about how that would likely guarantee him fat salaries for
life and he laughed. not exactly a happy laugh. he said that there are
hundreds of design schools in china now, but a very small percentage of the
students are finding work once they graduate. one of the reasons he cited
was the fact that good design was often deemed frivolous since, in truth,
schlock consistently sells better within china.

i asked if he thought this would change soon. he said he thought it would
take at least a generation. he said that there is enormous pressure on rural
populations to move to cities and so the level of cultural sophistication
and demand for good design keeps falling. he said that the level of
corruption within the major manufacturing companies and the governmental
bodies with whom they must work was not only entrenched, but resistant to
any review or recall.

i asked if government censorship was at least partly responsible for the
inability too challenge the corruption. he said that we misunderstand how
most chinese view free expression. he said most people there don't care
about free speech guarantees. they just want to make money. more money than
last year. so far, most people are making more money and so there is little
call for change.

i'm sure he spoke at least partly from the vantage point of jaded youth, but
he was certainly less than enthused about his future as an industrial
designer in china. he said that even though he had won several prestigious
awards and came from a well-known family, it was unlikely that he would be
allowed to leave the country and he anticipated a difficult road ahead.

couldn't help tossing this into the conversation...
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #15 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 06 14:43

    
It's hard for us to imagine living in a country that doesn't place
some value on free expression, but that's because it's part of our
tradition.  And considering that there are still many here that place
safety above liberty, it's not hard to image that someone in China
would be indifferent to free speech guarantees. Chairman Mao once said
something about effective governance being a matter of keeping the
people's bellies full and their minds empty...
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #16 of 129: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 5 Jan 06 14:58

    
I think when I was in my 20s I may have said the same about most
Americans -- that they   
> don't care about free speech guarantees. they just want to make money. 
> more money than last year.

I might still say it now and then, to be honest.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #17 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 06 15:39

    
Well, I'm used to designers moaning by now.  They  moan much less than
most novelists, probably because they're not melancholics by
temperament.

There's one thing you'll never hear a designer from any country ever
say: that
consumers have too high a standard of taste.  I have to wonder if
there is any
place where consumers are too refined, knowledgeable, and picky.  If
so, I'd be
guessing Denmark.

I don't hang out with Chinese designers, but from what I hear, they
have
a problem anticipating changes in taste.  You can get across to
Chinese students
that consumer items ought to be more elegant. It seems to be
harder for them to grasp that manufactured objects will and should
look radically different in  ten years.

Media design people have no problem with that concept, but graphic
design and industrial design people sometimes do; they tend to
think that the best design is "timeless."  The cyberati types, through
harsh personal experience,  are way more into the sell-by date.   

I spent a lot of my time last year trying to convince my
Art Center students that technological transitions make sense
and can be anticipated.  There are ways in design to make
the passage of time your friend.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #18 of 129: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Thu 5 Jan 06 16:01

    
China is a big deal for me, in large part because I spent seven years
of my military career watching them. 

Frankly, I abhor the camp of the Yellow Peril fearmongers, because I
think they are likely to get us into trouble. From a military
standpoint there's not a doubt in my mind that sooner or later we're
going to be in some kind uneasy, armed standoff with China. We're both
competing for the same resources, after all. For the military
industrial complex apologists who say that our technology will allow us
to face down China, I say baloney. The Chinese can buy technology that
they don't currently own, and they can reverse-engineer it and have it
on the shelf much faster than we can develop new stuff to outsmart
them. And let's not forget we're talking about a military heritage that
wrote the book on asymmetric warfare--at least three times. 

I don't think armed conflict between the US and China is inevitable,
however, because China is going to have its own problems before too
long. The sheer population pressure would be difficult even without the
upcoming affluent lifestyle demands. It's not going to be long before
they start running headlong into Malthus. Therefore a great deal of the
Chinese military apparatus will probably be looking inward, attempting
to enforce security. We're already seeing that in the way they attempt
to control the internet.

But on the more positive side, I think China has tremendous human
capital. Don't underestimate the power of those millions of Chinese
engineers trying to find ways to bring clean water and cheap
electricity to the Chinese people. If there are sustainable energy
devices out there to build, Chinese factories and cheap labor are going
to build them in massive amounts. The Chinese had a long history of
sustainable agriculture before the Great Leap Forward, and I suspect
many of those techniques will be brought into play. The Loess Plateau
is already being taken out of grain production and moved over to
forestation. More to the point, I strongly suspect Chinese bioengineers
will be on vanguard of cutting edge techniques for producing edibles
in industrial parks. Once the Chinese brain mass is turned toward
solving the problems of ecological sustainability, I think we're going
to see something fantastic. And if the Chinese people benefit, we are
all going to benefit sooner or later. 

Or I sure hope so, anyway. I'd hate like hell to get into a shooting
war with those folks. That's my recurring nightmare.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #19 of 129: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Thu 5 Jan 06 16:06

    
By the way, the Korean hip-hop thing is pretty goofy from an American
standpoint, not just because it's in Korean but because it's total
poser nonsense. Korean and Chinese hip-hoppers make the Backstreet Boys
look like genuine hood rats. The international appeal of hip-hop is in
its underdog roots and minority thug credibility. If you really want
to see some true international hip-hop, you got to go to Europe and
watch Turks and North Africans laying it down in German. Now that's
some good shit! 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #20 of 129: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 5 Jan 06 16:17

    
Bruce, did you spend much time last year talking about Viridian
design?  Or has that reached its expiration date?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #21 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 06 16:34

    
Well, it's hard to be a design fan when you're a design professor with
an office and a salary.  I also consistently find that
worldchanging.com covers every cybergreen issue I'd like to cover, and
then some.  At the moment, I'm contenting myself with writing the
introduction to their forthcoming book.

Still, if I find something to say about design and climate change that
isn't already being said louder elsewhere, you can bet I'll say it. 
When I first started this Viridian effort back in 1998, Chiapas was on
fire.  Today it's Texas that's on fire.  Tomorrow?  It's gonna be
worse. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #22 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 06 18:39

    
Speaking of Texas...

You're a Texan from the Rio Grande Valley who's been traveling the
world and is moving to Belgrade, so you have an unsual perspective.
Since I'm  a fellow Texan, I find myself wondering how your various
movements have affected your Texas roots, and vice versa?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #23 of 129: from GEORGE VOGT (tnf) Thu 5 Jan 06 19:15

    


George Vogt writes:



How about a "mortality and morbidity report" from the Dead Media department?
I just noticed that my neighborhood photography shop has been replaced by a
Chinese restaurant.   "Is the [movie] theatre really dead?"
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #24 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 06 06:00

    
Well, after most of a year in California, I think I've reached some
kind of global escape-velocity. I'm not so much "moving to Belgrade" as
finding another place to set down my laptop.  I know I'm doing
Australia and Sweden in a few months.  I may be back in Los Angeles to
do some consulting in a matter of days.

I'm a child of the Texas oil diaspora.  People in my family have been
in the Persian Gulf, the North Sea, Trinidad...  It surprises me a
little to see how many Texans I know, who seem like perfectly normal
homebodies, have offered to show up on my doorstep in Belgrade.  My
elderly aunt is jetting all over central America this year.  I have a
Texan uncle who lived in a recreational vehicle for about a decade.

I dunno what gets into us.  Maybe its genetic.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #25 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 06 06:05

    
I saw somebody taking pictures with a film camera yesterday.  That
painful way he had to stop and compose his shots...  It was like
watching a guy write with carbon-paper and a manual typewriter.  I
never used to carry a camera in the days of yore; there's nothing more
likely to signify you as a tourist and a mark for hustlers.  But I've
got a digital camera in my pocket most every day now.  It's a routine.

Every iPod you see is a dead Walkman.  When photography shops die,
their souls probably go to FlickR.

http://www.flickr.com/
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #26 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 06 07:05

    
We're supposed to be talking about the state of the world, and I'm thinking 
of the bits of news here as the year starts that will have an impact. Here's 
a few items in no particular order... 

Abramoff and other political scandals, and the Bush Administration's meltdown
Sharon's stroke
Pandemic Pandemonium
Domestic surveillance in the USA
Rebuilding New Orleans
Escalating climate change and other natural disasters
Digital convergence
Peak oil

What am I missing? And what kind of stew are we cooking here?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #27 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 06 08:05

    
Well, you're missing Brad Pitt, Angelina Jolie and the entire
continent of South America.  Then again, South America is "the
continent of the future, and always will be."  Who cares what's
happening in gigantic Brazil, oil-rich Venezuela and those
revolutionary Amerindian cocaine states?

It's interesting, though, that we have misplaced the drug war while
fighting an oil war. Maybe we'll misplace the oil in ten years  while
fighting over intellectual property.

With the possible exception of "digital convergence," (which I take to
mostly mean that Microsoft owns every box and line of code, nothing
new happens ever), your list there is entirely grim.  The state of the
world in 2005 is not entirely grim.  One shouldn't underestimate
people's resilience, their abilities to patch up and make do.  There
are places and situations that were well-night hopeless 20 years ago
that look pretty good now. 

 India and China are tremendous stories.  Even big pieces of Eastern
Europe are getting onto the EU carousel.   America's being run by
corrupt Lysenkoist morons, but, debilitating as that may be for us
Yankees, it also means that the remaining 94 percent of the planet has
some chance at the limelight.  Hey, South Korea could have been full of
cloning superstars -- if they could just get over their endemic Asian
urge to cook the books.

    The USA right now is the buried shadow of the Confederate States
of America.  You can watch GONE WITH THE WIND, and it's the secret
textbook of the Bush Administration.   The South lost that war for a
reason.  The South didn't have it in them to be a major power, because
they were bold, gallant, devout, crooked, dumb and full of unexamined
anxieties.

     The thing is, though: when a culture is "gone with the wind,"
it's never utterly and entirely gone. You can't make things go away by
distributing them into the wind.   It's just... up in the atmosphere. 
The emissions of the past form a smog.  A  breathable compost.  You
can't throw the past away and start over with a Year Zero.  There is no
"away."  Tomorrow is this place, at a different time.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #28 of 129: Cynthia Dyer-Bennet (cdb) Fri 6 Jan 06 08:14

    

(Note: Offsite readers with comments or questions can send them to 
<inkwell@well.com> to have them added to the conversation here)
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #29 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 06 08:19

    
>Brad Pitt

Not to mention missing white women.  What if there's another "runaway
bride?"

Here's what I'd add to that list: the absolutely unsustainable
economic model in the U.S.  Borrowing money from China so we can buy
stuff from China (and run huge federal deficits) -- it can't go on
forever.  Will it be a big story in 2006?  Maybe.  If not, surely soon
enough.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #30 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Fri 6 Jan 06 10:53

    
Speaking of off-site readers . . .


Mac asks:


Where do the stories in "Visionary in Residence" fit
in the Sterling canon?  Any particular recurring themes?


Evan Leatherwood wonders:


What about the slow murder of the American middle class, or at least the
slow death?  I'm thinking of "We See Things Differently" here.  Think we're
still headed in that direction?


Gerald Turner writes to inquire:

Greetings  Mr  Sterling

Do you think that the Mars rover discoverd alien artifacts posted
daily at my blog are real or rocks?

http://marsrelaystation.blogspot.com/
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #31 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 06 12:00

    
Gerald Turner's question reminds me of another item for the list - 
privatization of space travel. Won't be long before we have entrepreneurs in 
orbit, beginning with Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #32 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 06 13:16

    
http://marsrelaystation.blogspot.com/

During my stay in Pasadena, I actually met the characters who drive
those Mars Rovers inside the Jet Propulsion Lab. I witnessed them at
their work.  If they'd rolled over any alien artifacts, I'm pretty sure
they would have let on about it.

They're a remarkably methodical and responsible lot, even if they do
eat sugar donuts for breakfast.


"What about the slow murder of the American middle class."  I'm not
nuts about radical income disparities, but do we  want to carefully
police the boundaries of the class system?  If any class has been
murdered in my lifetime, it's probably the East Coast Anglo
Establishment.  I mean the patriarchal, gentlemanly, Ivy-League
educated, liberal-Republican upper class.  When I was born they pretty
much ran the works, and if you met one of 'em now, you'd just laugh in
derision.  The poor bastards must be more endangered than bison.

There is a kind of theme in VISIONARY IN RESIDENCE.  It's all about
using the approaches of science fiction to do other kinds of writing: 
design fiction, architecture fiction, fiction for scientists,
mainstream fiction about situations that used to be technically
impossible in an earlier day...  it's making a virtue of the fact that
I've been writing fictional stuff that's just radically scattered,
truly all over the map.  Likely I've been reading too many weblogs.

Most of the privatized space-travel efforts seem to be made by
ultra-rich cybergeeks.  I rather suspect this is more their ditzy
attempt to recapture the dreams of lost youth than the nuts-and-bolts
construction of a private spaceflight industry.   It makes me wonder if
the moguls of tomorrow won't try to build themselves cool little
cyberspaces.  Maybe they'll drop their loose change on personal,
souped-up, two-man personal search engines, or private super World of
Warcraft personal Xanadus.  Because, you know, that's what impressed
them when they were nine and ten.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #33 of 129: from FRANK SHANNON (tnf) Fri 6 Jan 06 16:13

    


Frank Shannon writes:




Ok here you went a step too far:

Most of the privatized space-travel efforts seem to be made by
ultra-rich cybergeeks.  I rather suspect this is more their ditzy
attempt to recapture the dreams of lost youth than the nuts-and-bolts
construction of a private spaceflight industry.   It makes me wonder if
the moguls of tomorrow won't try to build themselves cool little
cyberspaces.  Maybe they'll drop their loose change on personal,
souped-up, two-man personal search engines, or private super World of
Warcraft personal Xanadus.  Because, you know, that's what impressed
them when they were nine and ten.

Burn the heretic!  Seriously I wonder if the 63 miles up that the current
private spacecraft can go is enough for anything usefull, dont you have to
get at least 100 miles up to get a stable orbit.  Not to mention angular
momentum.  But if we don't get into space we are all going to die here which
is just depressing.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #34 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 06 17:19

    
Look, Frank, it might be just depressing that we can't die in WORLD OF
WARCRAFT heroically fighting orcs, but depression doesn't change the
laws of physics.

I'm as impressed as anybody that a top-end aviation engineer with a
geek's checkbook can burn rubber and nitrous oxide and go 63 miles due
up.  However, that's not an industry, that's a stunt.  I don't think
there's ever gonna be a rocket-based tourist industry, any more than
there's a hot-air balloon industry for tourist Atlantic crossings. 
That's not heresy; it's a realistic assessment of industrial
development.

On the plus side, given a whole lot of nanocarbon fiber, I'm starting
to think that a space elevator is physically doable.   Personal rockets
don't sound nuts though they are, while a space elevator sounds nuts
and it isn't; it's just unprecedented.  It's not personal, of course. 
It would take a major state power to build a space elevator.  It's
fantastic, but it's not delusional.  I suspect that the worst problem
with a space elevator is that it's hard to build small-scale models and
work out the kinks.

Of course, when and if a space elevator exists as a real-world working
object, like, say, a Hoover dam or a cheeseburger franchise, I kinda
doubt it's gonna relieve space-geeks of their unexamined existential
depressions.   If you think living in an airtight spacecraft is a swell
idea, you ought to talk to some Antarctic researchers or nuclear
submariners.  The technological sublime has got a short shelf life.
Once it's off the drawing board and you're living in it,  the adventure
and the charm fade fast. 

People born in a spacecraft would likely moan about how they can't die
on Earth and be properly buried in a real, authentic, rootsy, earthy
graveyard.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #35 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Fri 6 Jan 06 18:37

    
> Personal rockets don't sound nuts though they are.

haha. on slashdot the other day, they had a pointer to a finnish guy who is
nuts and brilliant. he strapped jet engines to his boots and then jumped off
a balloon at 7000 feet while wearing one of those wingsuits that make you
look like a flying squirrel. the propane and butane were stored in what
looked like hot water bottles stuff into his jump/wingsuit. there's video
at: http://www.bird-man.com/?n=windtunnel&nose=6

so there's a lot of renegade tech going on these days. seen any you think
portends larger good for us?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #36 of 129: from FRANK SHANNON (tnf) Fri 6 Jan 06 19:31

    


Frank Shannon writes:



Thanks for your kind reply Bruce.  Of course by us I meant the human race,
but beanstalks are a good idea.  I think we are going to have to use a lot of
rockets as crazy as they are since the only place it makes sense to start
serious work on tethers is in space.  I guess we could build the thing on the
ground and try to get it up by some other means but I'm not sure what.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #37 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 06 21:05

    
Isn't movement into space less about technology or money, and more about will 
and innovative thinking? And a Mars trip in the next couple of decades would 
probably be no more daunting than an ocean voyage into the unknown in the 
1400s. Not that I see any hurry to colonize space when we have terrestrial 
issues galore.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #38 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 06 09:36

    
"so there's a lot of renegade tech going on these days. seen any you
think portends larger good for us?"

*That depends what one means by "renegade" and "larger good."   I'm
pretty cool about today's tech hippies with solder-guns; I think MAKE
magazine has got a lot going for it, it's really brisk and
unpredictable.  The distributed-knowledge, web-autodidact thing is a
happening scene. Alpha geeks can make a dent in the tech scene, and
they don't have to sell out to VCs and ask permission first. I don't
underestimate this development; I've got an eye on those guys. 

*Discovery Channel has got almost a franchise on this wack tech stuff;
mythbusters, weird people with filthy jobs, huge unlikely gizmos...
there's a zillion home-repair shows all of a sudden. It's some kind of
popular groundswell.

*Open Source is kinda the ultimate version of the do-gooder angle,
that techie ethos of "watch me transform the world for the better from
my disheveled nonprofit garage".  Still, being "renegade" has a pretty
short shelf life, too.  If "renegade" tech has any economic potential,
then it gets noticed and commodified.  It's not "renegade" after that,
because it's become mainstream tech.  If it has no such mainstream
potential, then it's not really "renegade," either, because it won't
rock the status quo.  It's a private hobby, a lab curiosity, and it'll
never scale up for a mass market.  

*Then there's no-kidding criminal "renegade" tech, such as weapons,
IED bombs, crack labs, forged money, faked products...  There's
horrific amounts of this going on now.  Criminal underground tech has a
similar commodification problem.  Either you make black money and
become the pawn of global organized crime, or you don't make money and
nobody pays any attention to you; you're an evil James Bond genius, but
only in your own mind.

    

"Isn't movement into space less about technology or money, and more
about will and innovative thinking?"


*Why do we require rockets for 'will and innovative thinking?' The
track record is bad here.  Nazi Germany had rockets. And plenty of
will.  And rather a lot of innovation.  The Soviet Union committed huge
resources into space travel, to what end? Even Saddam tried to build a
space-cannon.  Did all their spacey will and innovation get 'em off
the hook?  

*The Iranians have a space effort now.  They also clutch their nukes
and scream for Israel to be wiped off the map. Are we happier because
their noble rocket effort gives Iran so much will and innovative
thinking?  

*There's stuff to do in space that's well worth doing: surveillance
sats, GPS, communications and astronomy.  The Indian space program
specializes in that: real-world space applications intended to directly
boost the well-being of the Indian general population.  I think you
could argue that the Indian space program has paid off and delivered
real infrastructural benefits.  That's probably because they've
resisted the urge to do Buck Rogers space-racing, and glamour
space-tourism -- efforts that must depend on raw sense-of-wonder for
their funding.  

    *Of course it's 'about technology and money.'  If we could hold
out breath and levitate into outer space, then it would be about sheer
transcendant will and cool, Tsiolkovsky-style visionary ruminations,
but that's not how it works.  Genuine, planetary-scale spacefaring
still requires huge, complex, ungainly technologies employing tens of
thousands of specialized employees. Even unmanned spacecraft are more
expensive per ounce than solid gold.  It's been like that since the
days of the V-2, sixty years ago.  As Tom Wolfe reported, "no bucks, no
Buck Rogers." It's an expensive, bureaucratic, complicated technology,
it's not cheap, easy and private.  I don't see how we gain much by
trying to elide this.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #39 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Sat 7 Jan 06 10:54

    
Two from the interweb:

bob anderson writes:


Hi Bruce,

How much did you connect with the fine art faculty at Art Center?  Mike
Kelly being one of the stellar artists there.

Where do you think the art world is going in this changing world?

BTW - I grew up in Pasadena and went to high school across the arroyo
from Art Center at John Muir.


And this:

Dear Bruce:

I've recently taken an interest in the idea that "appearance = truth",
specifically with the problems of identity and reality created by electronic
mediums.  I may be young enough to have been in diapers when cyberpunk was
taking off, but I still remember a time before news networks were "battling"
it
out on cable television.  In a world where what we see and hear through TV
and
the Internet is controlled by other people, most of which are constantly
trying
to argue that their version of the truth is more accurate than their
competitors, do you see an end to the constant information warfare that
claims
new minds everyday?  Will corporations eventually control all of our media
networks or do you think there will be a strong call for public ownership in
some form in the coming years?


Thanks,
Michael Black
English Major, Senior
Philosophy Minor
University of Louisville
michael.black@louisville.edu
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #40 of 129: from MICHAEL BLACK (tnf) Sat 7 Jan 06 11:47

    



Michael Black writes:



Dear Bruce:

I've recently taken an interest in the idea that "appearance = truth",
specifically with the problems of identity and reality created by electronic
mediums.  I may be young enough to have been in diapers when cyberpunk was
taking off, but I still remember a time before news networks were "battling"
it out on cable television.  In a world where what we see and hear through TV
and the Internet is controlled by other people, most of which are constantly
trying to argue that their version of the truth is more accurate than their
competitors, do you see an end to the constant information warfare that
claims new minds everyday?  Will corporations eventually control all of our
media networks or do you think there will be a strong call for public
ownership in some form in the coming years?


Thanks,
Michael Black
English Major, Senior
Philosophy Minor
University of Louisville
michael.black@louisville.edu
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #41 of 129: it was already on fire when I got here! (jet) Sat 7 Jan 06 14:35

    
wrt China, Korea and ID:

This fall I'll start in the ID program at Carnegie Mellon after nearly
20 years as a computer geek of some sort or another.  I was told by
someone in the department that the freshman class in the ID program is
roughly %50 Korean nationals who are only in the US to learn design
before going back to their jobs at home.

Do you know of anyone that's collecting stats on or tracking the
national origin of ID students at schools in the US?   I'd love to see
the percentages plotted against year for Japan, Korea, China, etc.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #42 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 06 15:38

    
There were a lot of Asians at Art Center, but there are a lot of
Asians everywhere.

I'm not a fine-arts guy by nature; I spent most of my time at Art
Center with
media design people, the illustration crowd, the occasional
product-design
and car-design guy, and my own students.  I fully appreciated the
lecturers
who came through from outside the school, too.  

It's a unique place, and 75 years old.  Art Center is
a stable strange-attractor; it's like watching the bubbles rise
in boiling oatmeal.

I miss the place in many ways, but I rather imagine they'll do fine
without me,
the way they did in those other 74 years.

As to where the art world's going, I suspect it's gonna be going into
little creative-class urban-entertainment culture centers.  In other
words,
it's gonna end up in "districts for creatives" that have been zoned
for
that kind of activity.  Places like that have existed for a long time,
but the process hasn't been spreadsheeted and rationalized.

A good example would be Navy Pier in Chicago, a place that
likely would be a junkie-infested eyesore if it hadn't been turned
into a weird, retrofitted culture-mall.  Fourth Street and Sixth
Street
in downtown Austin have that kind of vibe.  Even Las Vegas
is brandishing surprising amounts of top-end fine-art at
the customers who balk at their slot machines.   The art world
isn't a profit center -- but places that host the art world
become profit centers.  

I've even seen them try it in Singapore. There's a former
police station there, the picture of grimness, that's
been turned into a gaudy, rainbowed design boutique.
That dungeon is all plastic and skylights now.  I really wonder
how that's going to work out.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #43 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 06 15:43

    
do you see an end to the constant information warfare that
claims new minds everyday?

No, I don't see an end to that, but I don't fret about it much.
I'm not a metaphysician.  If you want to approximate "truth"
I think you ought to embrace the scientific method.
Formulate a testable hypothesis, experiment, publish,
and see if you can get the findings replicated.  

If you approach "reality" in a humble spirit of inquiry
I think that Truth will unveil herself, whereas if you stomp
around emitting gospel and drinking your own public-relations
bathwater, you're gonna come to grief, sooner or later.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #44 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 06 16:02

    
Truth with a capital T? As in absolute? Isn't truth, like beauty, more of an 
eye-of-the-beholder thang?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #45 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 06 07:05

    
You know, John, really, I'm just not even going to go there.
All I can say is that, thanks to dogged investigation, the human
race has learned that there were many important, real-world
phenomena going on for 13.7 billion years before there
were any human eyes and any human beholders.  What's
that say about the next 13.7 billion years?  Probably that
running around trying to define ontological absolutes
is a little stupid.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #46 of 129: Infradibulated Gratility (ssol) Sun 8 Jan 06 10:29

    
Oh, absolutes don't exist beyond the end of Time and 100% Entropy?

Death to all fanatics! My mother's patience is infinite, but mine own
is not ;-)

Anyhow, was the Make Magazine that you refered to http://makezine.com/
?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #47 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 06 11:04

    
"the human race has learned that there were many important, real-world
phenomena going on for 13.7 billion years before there were any human eyes
and any human beholders."

If you'd rather not go there, that's cool with me, but the existence of 
phenomena and the accumulation of facts aren't really the same as "truth." We 
can make decent assumptions about some aspects of reality, but our experience 
if reality is mediated by perception and cooked in the electrochemical stew 
that lives in our heads. We're crippled if we worry too much about the 
"truth" of reality beyond perception, granted, but there's a difference 
between acknowledgement of phenomena and the suggestion that there's some 
absolute truth that we can know. I just don't buy it.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #48 of 129: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Sun 8 Jan 06 12:24

    
>As to where the art world's going, I suspect it's gonna be going into
little creative-class urban-entertainment culture centers.  In other
words, it's gonna end up in "districts for creatives" that have been
zoned for that kind of activity.  Places like that have existed for a
long time, but the process hasn't been spreadsheeted and rationalized.<

The unrationalized versions of those were bohemias, and what seems to
happen nowadays is that young professionals buy up all the space and
any free energy gets sold to passive spectators before the artists
there can mature and become productive. The neighborhoods get eaten
before they get ripe.

Maybe rationally designed art incubators can replace bohemias, but
bohemias were also one of the few places where unclassified oddity was
tolerated. What replaces that? 

In 19th-century European one could emigrate to the colonies or light
out for the Territory. For about five minutes we thought we could head
out into space. We could always go into the fringe neighborhoods. But
now there does not seem to be even any place one can imagine going.
There is no margin left on the page. Everything wraps into everything
else. Where do we go now?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #49 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Sun 8 Jan 06 12:56

    
so bruce, it's a new year. for those of us trying to decide where to invest
our annual fear quotient, what do you think? bird flu? the weather? world
leaders wilding?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #50 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 06 15:35

    
Weather, zorca.  Definitely.  It's the long-term fear portfolio.

Ckridge, I think your answer is that bohemia no longer goes to a
"where."
Asking for solid bohemian districts that are  somehow devoid of yuppie
scum -- 
that's the flipside of the Bush Administration promoting "Homeland
Security"  
in a globalized war-on-terror.  

"Globalization melts the map."  

http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2005/08/

Globalization melts the map for everybody.  We're
not gonna get a world with international terrorists, multinational
business,
and local  gated communities for hipsters who have beards and bongos.

That day is over.  The new situation has got advantages as well as
deficits.  Otherwise I'd be ranting at you in some San Francisco coffee
bar, instead of posting on the WELL while packing for Milan.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #51 of 129: Rick Brown (danwest) Sun 8 Jan 06 18:12

    
Well, The WELL has been here for 20 years. And sometimes Peets and
proximity make the rant go down better. As a person who lives in the
middle of the firmly non melting-pot-map, We could even go for some
yuppie scum; if they brought a starbucks.

How far to singularity?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #52 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 06 18:20

    
Ah, I was wondering how long 'til we get to the s-word.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #53 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 06 19:38

    
 I suspect that something very peculiar by our standards may happen in
the mid-century, but if so, I don't think they'll be describing with a
sixty-year-old term like "Singularity."  And even if it renders the
world unrecognizable by our standards, that doesn't mean the people
undergoing it are going to feel all singular.  They'll just change
their standards.

Furthermore, after a "singularity," people will be worrying a lot more
about what happens next than about what just happened.  If you hit a
singularity, that's the beginning of a hairy situation, not the end of
it.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #54 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 06 21:07

    
Singularity's a fuzzy term, anyway. Even if you narrow it down to 
*technological* singularity, it still means different things to different 
people.

Transhumanists assume that we'll no longer be merely human, but posthuman. 
That's a science fiction trope. of course, but you seem to've got away from 
writing about anything quite so distant. Do you still think of yourself as a 
science-fiction writer? Could you write something like Schismatrix again, or 
more mech/shaper stories? 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #55 of 129: smorgasbord of pending developments (satyr) Mon 9 Jan 06 07:25

    
There's so much to choose from in thinking about what's on the verge of
happening that could change everything, that identifying even the most
important few would be difficult.

climate change (possibly runaway climate change)
deforestation and desertification
rapid loss of biodiversity
chemical pollution
soil erosion
declining oil production
aging populations
ubiquitous distraction

recycling and renewables
sustainable land management
seamless communications
radical access to and correlation of information
effective learning technologies
improving medical technology
augmentation and robotics
new economic/political opt-ins

All of these and more are headed our way like a giant tsunami.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #56 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 07:29

    
Well, the fuzzy terms are the best ones, and they don't come a lot
fuzzier than "science fiction."

I do think of myself as a science fiction writer, but I'm a science
fiction critic, too, which leads me think of genres in a historical
context.  BEOWULF is still a compelling work of fantasy, but we no
longer have the context in which Beowulf was composed: some bard with a
harp comes trudging over a hill and is welcomed by the tribal warriors
of the local community in some kind of longhouse.  I get a similar
frisson when I think of fifty-cent paperback Ace Doubles in a rotating
wire rack at the bus station.

One of the reasons I found science fiction attractive was that it was
the weirdest and least conventional material I could find in Gulf Coast
Texas in the middle of the 20th century.   With Google at hand, that's
just no longer the case.  There's some kind of Tom "Flat Earth"
Friedman levelling-effect going on with search engines.   American
science fiction was like a warm subcultural tide-pool, and there are
huge icy information currents running through it now.   I don't think
that my literary approaches are outdated, but the physical and social
texture of research, distribution, publishing and consumption have all
changed radically.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #57 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 07:41

    
That list satyr just posted explains why I read Worldchanging.

There's a vague rocket-fuel whiff of 20th century science-fiction in
Worldchanging, but really, just watching those cats trend-tracking is a
mind-expanding, sense-of-wonder experience.   I used to go hit the
stacks at the library to write a sci-fi book, but Worldchanging is like
a team of go-getters crammed a library into a giant fusion-powered
nanocarbon blender, hit puree, and spouted the results through a
firehose.  

It's going to lead to a new kind of prose, eventually.  There are
novels waiting to be written that have the ripply, blobjectified, 
computer-designed aspects of a Frank Gehry building.  Literature is
having a hard time responding to the realities of interactive
electronic prose -- "hypertext" didn't go anywhere useful.  I think
it's doable, though.  I might open a book tomorrow written by some kid
I never heard of, and see that it had already been done with great
success.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #58 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 06 11:00

    
I think we've talked before about the book, how it'll never go away
because it fits some need to hold an object that feeds code to our
wetware processes. But I think that the book is changing in that it can
always have a web extension where readers can post comments and
updates and authors can post errata and second thoughts... and perhaps
alternative endings or "author's cuts." Have you thought about writing
a novel (or nonfiction work, or nonfiction novel) that has web-based
extensions?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #59 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Mon 9 Jan 06 11:05

    
do you think kids growing up in front of monitors will have the same need to
physically hold an artifact?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #60 of 129: Rick Brown (danwest) Mon 9 Jan 06 11:19

    
When we wanna read in the bath-tub...
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #61 of 129: Jamais Cascio, WorldChanger (cascio) Mon 9 Jan 06 12:05

    
*blush*

And, for the record, that's not rocket-fuel, it's tequila.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #62 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Mon 9 Jan 06 12:39

    

   "Franciszek Kropula" (not our correspondent's real name) writes:

Dear Bruce,

I've just received your telegram:

HEY, EUROPEAN VIRIDIANS!
I?^?^?M MOVING TO EUROPE THIS MONTH

As an Eastern European living in Smaczpuki (Bytowia), I am very excited.
Can you provide us with some futuristic predictions regarding the effect
that your landing in Belgrade might have upon the region? And what
effect migh the region have on you?

Do you think, from what you've experienced,  that we do see the state of
the world, the global issues around us, differently in this part of the
world?

Do you think your arrival might unleash a green revolution in the
Balkans and Eastern Europe? Worldchanging is wonderful, but few have
heard about it around here. So will there be any new regional, Viridian
efforts on your part?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #63 of 129: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Mon 9 Jan 06 12:40

    
And Stefan Jones opines and inquires:


Weather troubles offer a place to invest money as well as fear!

I bought shares in a bunch of mobile home companies when the Gulf Coast was
getting pounded last year. (So did a lot of other cynical opportunists, and
they're all down since last fall, but I figure they're a good long-term
investment.)

Any other ideas for what industries might be in a "Climate Change Shit
Hitting
the Fan" portfolio?

Stefan
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #64 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 13:53

    
Odd you should ask that, Stefan.

You know how you replace frail, collapsing levees in the flood
insurance biz?
With hedge funds!

http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_03/b3967071.htm
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #65 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 13:55

    
Dear Bruce,

I've just received your telegram:

HEY, EUROPEAN VIRIDIANS!
I?^?^?M MOVING TO EUROPE THIS MONTH


*Dude, with formatting problems like that, no wonder you guys are
still using telegrams.


*I spent a year in California.  Did you see that green revolution I
unleashed there?
All I can say is that the fine folk of Smaczpuki had better brace
themselves.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #66 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 15:42

    
*Other green investments circa 2006:  General Electric and Wal-Mart.
That's right, I said GENERAL ELECTRIC and WAL-MART.  Greener than
a gourd.

Top Five Green Business "Socially Responsible Investing" stories of
2005:

http://www.greenbiz.com/news/news_third.cfm?NewsID=30045
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #67 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 06 15:44

    
do you think kids growing up in front of monitors will have the same
need to
physically hold an artifact?

*In a word, no, and in more words, they probably won't be all that
needy
about "monitors," either.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #68 of 129: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 9 Jan 06 16:17

    
Care to make any predictions about information pollution (spam and
advertising)?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #69 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 06 16:43

    
Ha! Looks like Bruce abbreviated his inkwell rants in favor of his blog 
today... the "Indian Centipede" crawls on!

http://wiredblogs.tripod.com/sterling/
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #70 of 129: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Tue 10 Jan 06 00:35

    
With respect to bruces, I have to disagree that we're not going to get
a world of international terrorists--we've already got one, and
there's no good reason to think the situation is going to change.

The proliferation of information technologies has made it remarkably
easy for local terrorists to link up with like-minded individuals the
world over. To a large extent they don't have to meet in real
space--they can share vague ideas over the internet and still manage to
move forward to a common goal. For that matter, all the intelligence
and technology they need is at hand. It's no surprise that the learning
curve of Iraqi insurgent IEDs is so steep. Everyone is sharing what
they are learning. There's no way to stop it. Fly over any good-size
town in Iraq and you'll see that a goodly number of those mudbrick
buildings down there are equipped with satellite dishes. In a cultural
sense, these guys are learning faster than we are. 

What's especially interesting is the way in which they manage to hold
onto age-old tribal mores while exploiting information age technology.
You'd think with more internet access some of these jihadis would be
succumbing to the free music downloads and abundant porn instead of
learning how to make IEDs out of infrared sensors. But by and large,
that doesn't seem to be the case. The lurid reality of blowing up a few
US troops is much more compelling. How long before this temperment
extends into western nations? We've already got our share of cultural
extremophiles, from Christian fundamentalists to PETA. High-tech,
low-cost terrorism could be the new extreme sport. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #71 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 06:56

    
Actually I'm abbreviating my responses because I had to pack.  I'm
leaving the US today and heading for Italy.  I'll be in Europe for
quite some time.  Connectivity may be patchy -- even though I'm hauling
two laptops.

    It seems that every time we have one of these interviews, it
concludes with me packing.  Name of the game, I reckon.  

    What bslesins is saying is becoming a common wisdom; when I need a
dose of that, I read "Global Guerrillas."

http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/

     There's a lot of meritorious analysis going on there, and it's
very counterintuitive by 20th century standards, and that's a good
thing, because this isn't the 20th century.     It's not about
state-on-state violence any more; it's about  the emergent global order
versus failed states.  The victory condition for global guerrillas is
a failed state.  And there are lots of global guerrillas and huge scary
patches of failed and failing state right nows.  And the Disorder and
the Order physically interpenetrate; globalization melts the map; there
are physical patches of state-failure even inside the most advanced
states.

     However, there is a nascent order inside the failure, too. 
People who live in conditions of failure can see what justice, law, and
order look like.  They see that on those satellite dishes, they get
news about that every day from the many, many people who flee the
Disorder and become new global diasporas.  

    Yugoslavia went to pieces; it's not going to reunite, but the
pieces are being subsumed into something better-organized, the EU.   
Lebanon was a hell-all Iraqi-style mess for 13  solid years; suicide
bombers even drove the US troops offshore in a scarified, humiliating
retreat.  But 'the terrorism as extreme sport thing' died away in
Lebanon, not because it was put down with American bayonets, but
because, in lurid reality, it was inherently unstable.  The terror's
not gone completely from Lebanon; there are still carbombs killing
leaders there; but, with time and personal experience, the population
lost their taste for general mayhem.   When your society is run by
profiteering warlords, it's a major drag.  Even the warlords themselves
get tired of the Sword of Damocles.  It's just no way to live.  It
stinks every single day.  

     The Disorder is not self-sufficient; it is  the dark shadow of
the Order.  It can't exist without the Order, it is parasitic.  It
lacks productive capacity; it can't feed itself and clothe and shelter
the populace.   If a state truly and utterly fails and it isn't propped
up by the ordered states outside, local people become refugees and
starve to death, they die of epidemics.  

     A nonstate like Somalia, which also defeated the US, survives
only because Somalis, many of them in the US, send money home.

    So, you can lose an asymmetric engagement with an enraged
population if you invade their territory.  But they're not going to get
it together to re-invade your state in return.  Terrorists are not a
state, they're not tyrants.  They don't have any of the organizational
mechanisms needed to run states.  They can't accumulate and manage
enough resources to put together a functional military.  And wherever
global guerrillas do try to settle, they soon find they have to pull up
stakes and move somewhere else.  

     And, though they're doing really well in Iraq and the borders of
Pakistan, electronically linked networks of guerrillas have a hard time
surviving in organized states with a functional police force.  Having
email and a website doesn't make you Zorro.  Laptops get captured. 
Cellphones get tapped.  Conspirators get rounded-up.  I never heard of
an Al Qaeda guy ratting out his pals for reward money, but their gizmos
betray them all the time.   

     Not only do they blow themselves up, but they've got a high
burn-rate in arrests whenever they settle in any area with an honest
cop on the beat.

     In this conversation, we've been describing a world where (a)
warm and fuzzy bohemian networks vanish instantly and (b) evil, demonic
terrorist networks thrive hugely and indefinitely, but, dark
sentiments aside, there's a logical disconnect there.  Those two things
can't happen both at once, that's just not possible. Bohemians aren't
terrorists, but networks are networks, globalization is globalization. 
The technosocial forces that shape these historical developments,
they're not trying to make things as bad for us as they can: they're
impersonal forces.   

   This era too will pass.  And when it does, who will sum it up?  
Try to name a single positive legacy of any kind that Al Qaeda has left
to anybody.  A building,  a bridge, a novel, a piece of music, a
movie, a style of clothing, even.  If they all blew up tomorrow, who
would miss them in the future?

    Time is not on their side.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #72 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 07:42

    
Al Qaeda may pass, but haven't "terrorists" of one stripe or another always 
been with us? 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #73 of 129: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 10 Jan 06 08:54

    
(Oops, I think Bruce was replying to echodog, not me.)
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #74 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 08:59

    
(I think you're right!)
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #75 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 10:31

    
*Oh I did, did I?  <grumble>  Well, you're all obviously
electronically connected, so it's time to round up the lot of you.

Kind of like the Spanish police did this morning.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #76 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 11:48

    
Always best to arrest the militants before they militate. Be careful who 
picks you up at the airport after you cross the pond... 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #77 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Tue 10 Jan 06 13:48

    
i keep globalguerillas and worldchanging next to each other in my feed
reader, which sometimes causes my synapses to short out.

i can't imagine a future without pockets of angry terrorist types, which is
a little scary, but my biggest fear is that more and more governments will
use their spotty existence to stomp out privacy. how do you see the current
openness of Internet protocols faring as we move forward?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #78 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 10 Jan 06 14:09

    
When I was working in Ireland in 2000 the term Cowboy was only used as
a pejorative. I come from a family of actual cowboys (I will be
helping mark and inoculate calves on 1/21). My family is fast running
out of people who want to live "the life" and Brokeback Mountain seems
poised to finish off the myth.

What will fill the cultural void? Private astronauts? Anti-terror
vigilantes?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #79 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 15:34

    
I believe our guest is in transit today, so we might have a slight lag.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #80 of 129: Jamais Cascio, WorldChanger (cascio) Tue 10 Jan 06 15:53

    
Hey Bruce, do you use RSS? If so, what are some of your feeds?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #81 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 17:46

    
I'm in the Chicago airport on Chicago airport pay-per-use wifi.

Boy, Daley Jr, or somebody, sure has jazzed up this joint since the
last time I blew through here.  It's gone all cleanlined and laminated
plywood and designery.  There's a new airport beer joint called
PRAIRIE BAR that's in full Frank Lloyd Wright style right down
to the glass and typography.

Furthermore, Austin has a six-month-old DESIGN WITHIN REACH
that sprang up in the River City while my back was turned.
It's almost as cool as the one that was down the street when
I lived in Pasadena.

Cowboy mythology givin' out on yuh?  It's all about *console cowboys*
now, dude.

Listen to this incredible bullshit out of Exxon-Mobil's pet version of
Kyoto, held in Australia, home of coal:

On Wednesday ministers from the six nations will meet some of the
world's top energy companies, including BHP Billiton and ExxonMobil, to
discuss public/private partnerships to develop and deliver
technologies such as clean coal and renewable energy.

"That's the target -- to get breakthroughs in technologies that are
absolutely a matter of life and death for the planet," Australian
Environment Minister Ian Campbell told Australian television on
Wednesday.

Hundreds of green activists are expected to stage protests outside the
meeting on Wednesday, which also includes business chiefs from United
States' Rio Tinto, Peabody Energy Corp and Japan's Nippon Steel Corp.

"You can't have a good environment with a damaged economy and the
green groups seem hell bent on trying to destroy the economy, trying to
destroy people's living standards and ultimately what happens is you
destroy the environment," Campbell said.


You know, that's almost the real answer to climate change, except it's
completely ass-backwards.  It's close, though.  We're about one
Category 5-through-downtown Washington away from a complete new way to
frame business.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #82 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 18:27

    
So we're in a hell where all paths lead to environmental destruction? I guess 
if it's going to happen anyway, I'd rather go down with a nice bottle of 
chianti and a Cuban cigar, sitting in an Eames chair from Design Within 
Reach....

But a whole different set of people who forgot to buy oil companies decades 
ago seem to think there may be economic opportunity in clean energy, so maybe 
we can mitigate without destroying the global economy, no?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #83 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 18:35

    
*** THIS IS NOT AN INVOICE ***


Dear Bruce Sterling,

Thank you for becoming a Wireless Broadband Internet Customer!  

Upon your first successful login, your card will be charged for 24
hours of service.  A formal receipt will be sent to you within (2)
hours of your first session being completed.

The information shown below describes the rate plan you signed up for:

DayPass - $6.95
$6.95 for full day access

Save Time Next Time!

No need to re-enter your credit card information the next time you
visit a Concourse WiFi location.  The same user account you recently
created can be used each time you visit any of our WiFi locations. 
Just select the Returning Users link found on the login URL and enter
your username and password.  It?s that easy!  

If you have any questions regarding your account, please contact us at
1-800-550-5030 or via email at support@concoursecommunications.com.

Thanks again!

Concourse Customer Service Team 

--------------------------------
Hold unlimited Web conferences
for One Flat Rate!
Try GoToMeeting FREE 

Unlimited Web Conferencing for One Flat Rate

GoToMeeting? is the easiest and most affordable way to conduct online 
meetings with coworkers and clients ? without ever leaving your desk. 
Give on-the-fly or scheduled presentations, conduct product demos, 
collaborate on projects and more in real time with just a PC and an
Internet connection. Best of all, you can meet as much as you want for

as long as you want ? for one low flat rate.  Try it free today for 30
days.  

Just visit www.gotomeeting.com/concoursecommunications
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #84 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 18:43

    
Well, few rival me in my keen awareness of grim Greenhouse apocalyptic
scenarios, but you know what?  If it weren't for Hitler, Mao, Stalin
and Gandhi, the 20th century would have developed worldwide at a
cracking free-market pace, in peace and prosperity, and we ALL WOULD
HAVE FRIED HORRIBLY CHOKING ON OUR OWN SPEW sometime in the 1960s, way
before we had our chance to get our heads around the creepy nature of
environmental damage.

So, in a way, Communism, Indian socialism, and a couple of world wars
saved our bacon.
We've *already* been saved from catastrophe once, while not even
trying.

I wish I could tell you I had a cool master plan to avert
eco-collapses, but I don't.  That's not a counsel of doom, though.  
I'm inclined to think that we'll more or less patch it together through
objects and processes that we don't even have nouns and verbs for yet.
 I mean, imagine a Singularity right in the middle of an Eco-Collapse.
 They'd be radically "collapsing upwards,' right?  You couldn't beat
it as the setting for a novel.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #85 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 19:55

    

Das tweakfest Team wnscht Ihnen einen fulminanten Start ins neue
Jahr!


tweakfest 2005 Webcasts powered by XTENDX

Prof. Dr. Cyberpunk Bruce Sterling: The Hacker Crackdown
http://194.246.119.90/xbend/simplex/tweakfest/theHackerCrackdown/index.html
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #86 of 129: Infradibulated Gratility (ssol) Tue 10 Jan 06 19:57

    
www.concoursecommunications.com, was improbably founded in
Springfield, MA, the Silicon (metal machining) Valley of the 19th
Century. 

Interesting connection to 9/11. Their folks were on their way to a
first day of work unwiring the WTC when History happened.

Had they been there days or weeks or months earlier, a little tech in
the aether might have changed many lives.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #87 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 06 20:44

    <scribbled by bruces Tue 10 Jan 06 20:45>
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #88 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 06 21:26

    
I'm listening to the webcast and thinking how amazing it is how things have 
played out. What if the Internet had been a project, not of a bunch of 
idealistic DARPA engineers and unix hackers, but of Bill Gates and his ilk? 
What if hackers and Open Source geeks had been shut down, and after the 
collapse of the Internet bubble of the 90s, everybody'd shrugged and gone 
back to their typewriters and television sets? 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #89 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Wed 11 Jan 06 06:00

    
Well, the dotcom boom had absolutely nothing to do with the
fundamental usefulness of personal computers or the internet.  It just
proved you can't run a business without a business model, which is
something no one had previously thought needed proving.

There were similar financial scandals and blow-ups in the infancy of
the electric business, but it wasn't like people were going to go back
to whale oil lamps.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #90 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 06 06:21

    
My point, though, is that if the Internet had been built differently, and 
especially if it had been structured to serve proprietary interests, it 
wouldn't have the same value or, as you say, "fundamental usefulness."
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #91 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Wed 11 Jan 06 06:33

    
Keeping in mind that what I know about the specifics of computer
networking would barely fill a 3*5 card, I think it's pretty hard to
imagine a scenario in which some sort of open, non-proprietary network
would not have become dominant.  There were just too many "volunteers"
around willing to create such things, and in the beginning there was no
particular money to be made in it, so the idea of Gates or anyone else
investing in a proprietary network seems unlikely.

I think the only way it could have played out that way is if multiple
governments essentially decided to ban the development of such
networks, or grant some sort of monopoly privilege to operate them a la
Ma Bell back in the day.  But there again, that sort of thing tends do
be done (at least in this country) mostly when there's obvious money
to be made.  I think the fact that for years and years the internet
seemed to be nothing more than a play space for scientists, hobbyists,
and cranks protected it from that sort of scenario until it was far too
late to do anything about it.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #92 of 129: Rick Brown (danwest) Wed 11 Jan 06 06:42

    
NSA can't spy on my typewriter.

What will the utter and complete lack of privacy mean to my son's
children? Every IM, drunken usenet post, email, pron download is part
of his (any my) perminent record. There is now, a perminent record.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #93 of 129: Ari Davidow (ari) Wed 11 Jan 06 07:24

    
You know what, some element of privacy was illusory and short-lived. A 
couple generations ago most of our grandparents lived in small towns in 
crowded housing (even when rural, relatively crowded by modern standards). 
There has been a great rush of anonymity that comes with times of great 
social change, but I don't think it's the norm for most people through 
most of human history. 

That doesn't mean we shouldn't be scared about people listening in on our 
conversations or the way the government can keep tabs on our physical 
location, but I'm not sure people were more secure 200 or 500 years ago 
from their government. Certainly, at the moment, we have a veneer of 
accountability that works for most people most of the time - it isn't as 
deep or as real as I'd like, but some perspective that we're not coming 
from some great free time in the past might be worth having.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #94 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 11 Jan 06 07:58

    
Nobody's eavesdropping on the Amish. If you live somewhere truly rural
or "disconnected" you develop a pretty deep attachment to privacy.
There are plenty of places on every continent where people have a very
19th century, "life is long and the emperor is far away" mindset. 
You don't feel above the law, but you do feel beyond it. I know
because it's how I live. I do see and feel the connected world
encroaching. Not just practically, but psychologically as well.
There are farmers and loggers and truckers and midwives all over the
world who are trying to figure out how to let in the world through cell
phones and the internet without losing their identity and privacy into
the great whirlwind of the info age. 

In China the government doesn't much care what they think or feel
about such matters, but in India, Argentina, Venezuela, Brazil,
Pakistan, Mexico and the US these folks do inform the politics and the
markets. George Bush and Evo Morales and Cargill and Monsanto and Rural
folks lives are all intertwined. Backlashes occur when the "simple
folk" feel overly coerced into rapid changes.   
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #95 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 06 09:18

    
I'm in London.

Hot*Spot

Welcome to the Internet

You are now online with high-speed access. ?The session counter to the
right will tell you how much time you have left

Secure connections
If you want to use a secure connection, please start your VPN-Client
now. A secure webpage always starts with https:// and a padlock symbol
appears in your browser.

You can end your session in a number of ways:
               Shut your VPN session down, if you are using one.

               Click the 'log-out' button below the session counter (We recommend
you bookmark this page.)

               Type "logout." into your browser's URL field and press enter

               After 15 minutes of inactivity you will be logged out automatically
Now online
Time remaining
0:00:59:33
days:hours:min:sec

Download Receipt
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #96 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 06 09:25

    
Actually you *can* spy on typewriters.

http://www.hungarian-history.hu/lib/genoci/genoci07.htm

Typewriters Declared "Deadly Weapons"


July, 1983
The Transylvanian Quarterly

In the first week of April, Dictator Ceausescu declared a new law,
which stands unique in the history of mankind. Every typewriter in the
country in the possession of private individuals had to be taken to the
local police station, where it was recorded and "fingerprinted".
"Loyal citizens" received permits for the possession and use of their
typewriters, while to those who are regarded by the police as "enemies
of the regime", permit was denied and their typewriters confiscated
without any recompense. As the Orlando Sentinel expressed it in its
April 15, 1983 issue, "Rumania is banning possession or use of
typewriters by citizens...who pose a "danger to public order or state
security". 
The first known "victim" of this new law in the city of Kolozsvar
(Cluj Napoca) was an 84 year old widow, Mrs. Ilona Bartha, whose
husband, once a free lance journalist, left behind a big, old fashioned
typewriter stored in the attic of the old Bartha home, now shared by
six families. Mrs. Bartha, who has only one room left to her use in her
old home, walked over to the police station and reported her husband's
old typewriter, collecting dust in the attic. "You must bring it in",
the SECURITATE officer in charge told her. "I can't," she replied, "it
is much too heavy. Send somebody to get it. You can have it for good." 
One week later the police came to the house on the Monostori Street,
took the typewriter and arrested Mrs. Bartha as the "illegal owner of
an unregistered typewriter". She was sentenced to three months in jail.


(((Of course, I'm not too sure of the credibility of this Internet
source, as
I haven't bothered to spy on him much yet.)))


(((Awesome case here of journalists spying on hapless politicians; I
just
blogged it.)))

http://www.cobrapost.com/documents/one.htm 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #97 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 06 09:26

    
Also, the Amish are under telephoto surveillance by anybody who cares
to pay for a satellite shot or who bothers to use Google Earth.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #98 of 129: Irham Checho (bumbaugh) Wed 11 Jan 06 11:31

    
Irham Checho writes, from off-Well:


Hello!

I am a former SF fan and a former journalist from former Yugoslavia. What
I would like to know right away, no frills, is hopefully a simple
question about past: has the Mirrorshades anthology ever been published
in Serbo-Croatian, Serbian or Croatian edition, to the best of your
knowledge?

This is sort of backlash: I lost my interest in SF because the war made
reality as badass as any apocaliptic scenario gets, around here. But I
never renounced this emotion that makes me stroll through SF shelves of
any Western bookshop that I visit every now and then.
 Now, everyone and their aunts talk puffed up about cyberpunk and
virtuality - same fucks who bullied me for reading "stupid imaginary
stuff" back when I was a kid, now choke in a mouthfull of cyber, and yet
still they know shit about SF, they care shit about SF.

Well, today, as I realize re-reading it for umpteenth time, Mirrorshades
are hotter than ever. And I'd be delighted to make a translation in
Bosnian/Serbian/Croatian (screw politics, we're mutually readable
whatever we call the lingo). The catch is, I have a war-induced and
prolonged gap in the knowledge of local, post-yugoslav SF fandom scenery.
So perhaps someone did it already.

Be kind to reply me to the best of your knowledge, and keep up!

Irham ?e?o,
PR Manager, Open Broadcast Network TV
Bosnia


["?e?o" is almost certainly a failure of character mapping from Irham's
alphabet to the one in my mail client -- bumbaugh]
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #99 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Wed 11 Jan 06 11:32

    
and i moved AWAY from rural america because there was no privacy there.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #100 of 129: nape fest (zorca) Wed 11 Jan 06 11:44

    
slip
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #101 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 11 Jan 06 14:57

    
What connected people think about the lives of rural/agricultural
folks doesn't change their psychological relationship to fastworld.
The elections of Bush and Morales are both attempts to slow the pace
of change, as is Al Qaeda. Reluctance to change may be more powerful
than curiosity.  

Another take.

<http://www.pbs.org/now/transcript/transcriptNOW140_full.html>

KURT VONNEGUT: Look, we after two World Wars and the holocaust and the
nuclear bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and after the Roman games
and after the Spanish Inquisition and after burning witches, the
public-- shouldn't we call it off? I mean, we are a disease and should
be ashamed of ourselves. 

And so, yeah, I think we ought to stop reproducing. But since we're
not going to do that, I think the planet's immune system is trying to
get rid of us. 

DAVID BRANCACCIO: The planet is sort of trying to shed us as if we are
some sort of toxin. 

KURT VONNEGUT: Look, I'll tell you. It's one thing that no cabinet had
ever had, is a Secretary Of The Future. And there are no plans at all
for my grandchildren and my great grandchildren. 

DAVID BRANCACCIO: That's a great idea. In other words a Cabinet post--


KURT VONNEGUT: Well, it's too late! Look, the game is over! The game
is over. We've killed the planet, the life support system. And, and
it's so damaged that there's no recovery from that. And we're very soon
going to run out of petroleum which powered everything that's modern.
Razzmatazz about America. And, and it was very shallow people who
imagined that we could keep this up indefinitely. But when I tell
others, they say; Well, look there's-- you said hydrogen fuel. Nobody's
working on it. 

DAVID BRANCACCIO: No one is working seriously on it is what you're
saying. 

KURT VONNEGUT: That's right. And, and what, our energy people,
presidents of our companies, energy companies never think. All they
wanna do is make a lot of money right now.

-------------------------

DAVID BRANCACCIO: Well, I want to ask you about this. You ask in the
book a question that actually you don't answer so I want to 

KURT VONNEGUT: I'm old. 

DAVID BRANCACCIO: But I want to-- think about answering this one. You
write "what can be said to our young people now that psychopathic
personalities  which is to say persons without consciences, without
senses of pity or shame  have taken all the money in the treasuries of
our government and corporations and made it their own?" What can we
say to younger people who have their whole lives ahead of them? 

KURT VONNEGUT: Well, you are human beings. Resourceful. Form a little
society of your own. And, hang out with them. Get a gang. 


 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #102 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Wed 11 Jan 06 15:07

    
I almost always agree with Vonnegut 100%.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #103 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 06 20:11

    
So it goes.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #104 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 06 03:13

    
I'm in Milan.  About to go out to the Duomo and that huge shopping
arcade,
where I always spend hours and never buy anything.

No, Mr. Checho, there has never been a Bosnian, Serbian, Croatian,
Slovenian, Montenegrin, Macedonian, Kosovar, or splinter-republic
UN protectorate edition of MIRRORSHADES; at least, not one that
I ever heard of or got paid for.

You know a good anthology?  You ought to read Pat Cadigan's
UItimate Cyberpunk anthology.  It's, like, more ultimate
than the first cyberpunk anthology.

Vonnegut, Vonnegut....

KURT VONNEGUT: Well, it's too late! Look, the game is over! The game
is over. We've killed the planet, the life support system. And, and
it's so damaged that there's no recovery from that. And we're very
soon
going to run out of petroleum which powered everything that's modern.
Razzmatazz about America. And, and it was very shallow people who
imagined that we could keep this up indefinitely.

*Why is it, I wonder, that elderly science fiction writers with
failing
health get into this "Mind at the end of its tether" syndrome?
It's just like HG Wells in 1945:  "well, the A-Bomb's been invented.
And, uhm, I've got cancer.  Therefore, annihilation is at hand."

If you die, that's bad, and if a lot of people die, that's worse,
but it's not some kind of clean syllogism that wipes the
planet free of the human species.  There's exactly ONE
phenomenon that is swiftly and conclusively vanishing
like a dissolved toxin, and that's the author himself.  

If civilization collapses, then it collapses, but the human
race is scattered in tens of thousands of little enclaves
from pole to pole.  Even if all four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse are whipping their skeletal horses into a
lather, it's not gonna be easy to get ALL of them.
ALL of them?  Do the math!
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #105 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Thu 12 Jan 06 04:22

    
Still, one can hope.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #106 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 06 05:48

    
I think we're tempted to go apocalyptic in our thinking when we have the
right combination of quakes, tsunamis, hurricanes, plague, polar and climate
disruption, war, political corruption, and celebrity divorce. 2005 was just 
one of those years. Surely 2006 will be better?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #107 of 129: Rick Brown (danwest) Thu 12 Jan 06 07:02

    
Naw. Bush is still in power.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #108 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Thu 12 Jan 06 07:11

    
I think reading Vonnegut's opinions strictly in terms of his being old
and ailing is unfair -- he's sounded similar notes for a very long
time.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #109 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 07:31

    
He was obviously being hyperbolic. The point I was trying to
illustrate was that social recalcitrance leads to powerful political
backlash that is, and will be, exploited by savvy manipulators of all
stripes and it does, and will continue to, limit our ability to expand
the benefits of globalization in any kind of even handed or fair
manner.

I referred to Vonnegut because - "I'm just this guy" - and he's, well,
Kurt Vonnegut. Plus age lends perspective. My 95 year old Aunt, who
has been all over the world (and has learned to use the internet in the
last 5 years), says that she's never seen such turmoil and general
insensibility. She has no fear of her own death, but she is quite
worried about the life my children, and theirs, will have to live. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #110 of 129: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Thu 12 Jan 06 08:14

    
I'm not sure it's entirely correct to suggest that terrorists
contribute nothing to the world (to respond to a post quite a ways
back...) First of all, while it's true that terrorists tend to be more
destructive than constructive, it's also true that insurgent networks
in the past have managed to build entire alternate social support
structures. One reason Israel has found it almost impossible to uproot
HAMAS is that HAMAS led by establishing clinics and schools, not by
blowing things up. That came later. 

Second, we can't underestimate the folkloric power of the terrorist,
for lack of a better description. Societies have always had their
heroic rebels and outlaws. I would say that the folkloric power of an
outlaw group or terrorist goes up in fairly direct proportion to the
power of the government they are opposing. Of course, with information
technology, that effect could be greatly magnified.

While terrorist organizations do not contribute much, in the end, that
doesn't mean they are in danger of dying out. And frankly, in this day
and age it doesn't take many of them to have a disproportionate and
very ugly effect. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #111 of 129: Frank Shannon (bumbaugh) Thu 12 Jan 06 08:53

    
Frank writes:

Bruce- I was hoping for some crazy rants, but I guess we had to settle for
reasonable discourse.

Still if civilization collapses, the difference between 6 billion deaths and
6 billion and change deaths isn't going to matter to most of us.  We should
probably do what we can to avoid the collapse of civilization if possible.

Right now I'm feeling like there is a balancing act going on which gets more
and more difficult all the time.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #112 of 129: clloyda (bumbaugh) Thu 12 Jan 06 08:55

    
"clloyda" writes:


Terrorism has been added to the vocabulary of rebellious youth. There is a
lot of it because there are many young people. Old people get them to strap
on the bombs.

The long range solution might be birth control, like in Freakonomics. When
the population ages, who will do the work? Who will do the terror?
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #113 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 09:25

    
>The long range solution might be birth control, like in Freakonomics.
When the population ages, who will do the work? Who will do the
terror?

I just heard about the extremity of the developing age demographic
tilt occuring in China and India. How will the few young support the
many old? What mechanism exists, or will arise, to provide for a
Sino-Indian populace w/ an average age of 60 (projected for +-
2040)that expects to enjoy a new and improved living standard? Can we
engineer our way out of a food/resources crunch of those proportions ? 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #114 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 06 10:16

    
I don't think we're likely to confront the difference between six
billion and six billion and change.  Of course that isn't going to
matter to most of us, because most of us would be dead.  In another 200
years though, excepting of course for Ray Kurzweil, ALL of us are
going to be dead, and if there were some human loose-change around,
they would be human loose-change who had been around for two centuries.
 They, the people from two centuries from now, wouldn't care about us
or Kurt Vonnegut; they would have some kind of business as usual under
way.

Apocalypse is an intellectual vice.  If civilization collapses or
takes a major hit,  it's  gonna be like living in New Orleans now, only
on a planetary scale.  New Orleans took its nightmare scenario and now
they're arguing about real-estate.   We don't have no New Orleans. 
We've got a wrecked New Orleans.  Furthermore, next year we may well
have a re-wrecked New Orleans.  It may be that watching New Orleans get
wrecked is the new normal.  

 If half of New Orleans had drowned and we'd had to bury them all,
that would have been very scarifying and traumatizing, but by now, they
would STILL be talking about real-estate.  In Hiroshima they talk
about real estate. Outside Dachau they talk about real-estate.   If the
ecosystem collapses and half of us die along with Kurt Vonnegut,  the
survivors, which means half of us, will have to deal with the
consequences for the rest of our lives.  Talking about "Apocalypse"
gets us absolutely nowhere.  It just means we're talking about
something unthinkable with theological terms, as if God would end the
world for us because our imagination lacks capacity.   Even if you're a
Christian you ought to recognize that demanding an Apocalypse doesn't
make it so; you're not the Boss, you don't get to end history on your
own say-so.

We need to get over talking about Utopia and Oblivion.  Those are the
kinds of mental blinkers that got us into this mess in the first place.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #115 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 06 10:25

    
I think echodog is right about Hamas.  There are a lot of political
parties with terrorist wings who ended up in government.    Hamas might
become a real government if they weren't clinging to a no-mans-land
that gets rolled over, bombed and shelled by Israelis, Syrians, and
Palestinians.  A lot of terrorists have a Robin-Hood giveaway wing; 
Osama bin Laden was famous for charities and hospitals.

They still have severe organizational problems if they can't get
votes, though.  Global guerrilla groups lack checks and balances, they
can't redress internal grievances, they can't sign treaties, and they
lack good mechanisms for transfer of power.  Hamas gets votes.  They
might be able to achieve all those other things, too, in which case
they might turn into the Irish or the East Timorese, some day.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #116 of 129: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 12 Jan 06 10:43

    

> Apocalypse is an intellectual vice.

Deeply egotistical, too.   Why, the idea that the world might outlive me!
Apocalypse is vanity on a grandiose scale.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #117 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 12:14

    
I don't think there's going to be an apocalypse. I'm more worried that
Snowcrash World (a world devoid of a commons)will actually manifest. I
don't want my kids to have to live in that world when they are old.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #118 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 06 14:28

    
You're assuming the Metaverse would have no commons? 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #119 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 15:36

    
I'm concerned that there will be nothing remotely resembling
wilderness. That's why I bought some and set it aside. But I'm no Ted
Turner and, even if there were lots of private landowners like that, it
wouldn't be enough. The capital gang has a big headstart in every
respect.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #120 of 129: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 12 Jan 06 15:54

    

Yeah.  And with the new eminment domain law one can imagine a court 
deciding that private wilderness was economic blight, for that matter, 
and handing it over to a corporation.   

In some ways, with communication and garbage reaching the whole planet, 
wilderness as John Muir or even Ansel Adams knew it -- in a "modern" 
non-adversarial but "pristine" sense -- is already gone.  Not that 
fighting for some land to be other than real estate is not worthwhile.
Good for you for setting some aside.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #121 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Thu 12 Jan 06 16:09

    
There's a big difference between having one New Orleans and having an
entire world like New Orleans.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #122 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 16:12

    
Make sure to include a well funded Land Trust in your Gang.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #123 of 129: William F. Stockton (yesway) Thu 12 Jan 06 16:19

    
We have about a quarter of a world "like New Orleans". Check out
Mogadishu, Madagascar, Manila, Mexico City, Mosul and that's just a few
of the M's. 
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #124 of 129: Carl LaFong (mcdee) Thu 12 Jan 06 16:26

    
Good point.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #125 of 129: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 12 Jan 06 16:30

    

I dunno... there are aspects of NOLA right now that are like no other place!
The vast ghost-town of grey, drowned, rotting neighborhoods with a tiny 
rim of functioning city  --  and the current fight about whether the city 
should return in a smaller footprint and who is not allowed to rebuild -- 
is pretty unusual.  (I was just there, and posted pictures and comments 
here:  http://www.flickr.com/photos/gail/sets/1747668/ )  
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #126 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 06 17:10

    
I like that sign that says "I made love in this fridge last night."

Cities like New Orleans could become the rule rather than the exception, 
based on some climate change scenarios, or time bombs like La Palma:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/science/horizon/2000/mega_tsunami.shtml
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #127 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 06 02:00

    
We're on a slider-bar between the Unthinkable and the Unimaginable.
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #128 of 129: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 06 02:41

    
People with big checkbooks are starting to complain at me that it's
time to shut up on the WELL and get back to work.

And you know what?  They're right.

Hasta la vista, as the Governor of California said before he fell off
his unlicensed motorcycle and had to have his busted mouth stitched up.

I don't want to end this thing on a note of uncharitable
schadenfreude, but, you know, life is full of justice and poetry, if
you can make time to look.

bruces
http://blog.wired.com/sterling/
  

inkwell.vue.262 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2006
permalink #129 of 129: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 13 Jan 06 05:23

    
Perhaps a haiku
is the perfect way to end
this state of world rant.
  

