inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #0 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 18 13:40

    
The year has turned, 2019 is happening, and we're here once again to
have a two-week conversation about the State of the World. This
year's model is the bumfuzzle edition, chaos and confusion being the
proverbial order of the day. We can't promise definitive solutions,
but hopefully we'll raise useful questions and stimulate creative
and critical thinking as we bring in the new year.

We're having this conversation on the WELL, an influential,
independent online community that's been active for over three
decades. Members of the WELL will likely join the discussion, and
readers who are not members can send comments and questions to
inkwell at well.com - we'll post those as well. Mention "State of
the World" in the subject of the email.

This will primarily be a discussion including comments and rants
from four principal investigators -

The usual suspects:

Bruce Sterling is a science fiction writer, journalist, net critic,
design maven, cyberspace theorist, and global traveler. Early in his
career, Bruce was a founder and proponent of the cyberpunk sub-genre
of science fiction.  Originally from Texas, he spent a lot of time
in India as a youth, and he currently lives in Torino, Italy, with
occasional forays to Ibiza, Spain. But he's a well-traveled citizen
of the world, known for his many insightful talks as well as for his
fiction and nonfiction writing. Here's a talk he gave last October,
on "How to Be Futuristic":
https://theinterval.org/salon-talks/02018/oct/16/how-be-futuristic-bruce-sterl
ing

Jon Lebkowsky was cofounder and CEO of three companies, including
Polycot Associates, which was recently transformed into a
worker-owned web development cooperative. He's co-producer of the
Plutopia News Network (https://plutopia.io), a podcast and blog
focused on culture, media, and technology. He is also known as an
activist and writer/blogger focused on strategic foresight, Internet
evolution, digital culture, cyber liberties, media, and society.  

Our special guests:

James Bridle is an artist and writer working across technologies and
disciplines. His artworks have been commissioned by galleries and
institutions and exhibited worldwide and on the internet. His
writing on literature, culture and networks has appeared in
magazines and newspapers including Wired, Domus, Cabinet, the
Atlantic, the New Statesman, the Guardian, the Observer and many
others, in print and online. He lectures regularly at conferences,
universities, and other events. "New Dark Age", his book about
technology, knowledge, and the end of the future, was published by
Verso (UK & US) in 2018. His work can be found at
http://jamesbridle.com.

Tiffany Lee Brown, a.k.a. T, is a writer and interdisciplinary
artist from Oregon. An editor of Plazm magazine, she wrote the
poetry collection A Compendium of Miniatures. Her writing has
appeared in Utne, Tin House, Bookforum, Boing Boing, Oregon
Humanities, Wired, Whole Earth Review, and Bust, along with various
anthologies and newspapers. Her art, music, and performance pieces
have been shown at Performance Works NW, Enteractive Language
Festival, and Portland Center Stage, among others. Rooted in lived
experience, T's creative work delves into themes of nature, spirit,
consciousness, and the American West. She lives with her husband and
son in the woods near Sisters, Ore., where she writes for the local
newspaper and helps kids learn strong values through hands-on
entrepreneurship via Kid Made Camp.

Jake Dunagan is an experiential futurist, political system designer,
and professor of strategic foresight.  His work centers around the
concept of social invention—developing futures concepts and
participatory platforms to help people and organizations around the
world re-imagine and re-design their futures. Jake is Director of
the Governance Futures Lab at the Institute for the Future, a
non-profit research and education group in Palo Alto, CA.  He
teaches strategic foresight in the Design Strategy MBA program at
the California College of the Arts and at the Center for Integrated
Design at the University of Texas. He is International Mentor for
the Deseño de Mañana program at CENTRO, a media and design school in
Mexico City.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #1 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:51

    
The Chinese Year of the Pig, 2019, here we are!

We do this State of the World every year out of sheer glee.  It's a
mental hygiene for us, a comic relief, like taking a cleansing
squeegee to our grimy apartment windows.  Which is something I
actually did here, just yesterday, and I can tell you, my view's a
lot crisper now.

These aforementioned windows are way up here on the 4th floor, so I
couldn't get to every corner of 'em without plummeting straight to
my doom.  So, admittedly, big grimy streaks remain.  However, thanks
to this cheerful year-starting effort, they can now be recognized as
actual streaks of grime, instead of a grim, grimy worldview thick
with comprehensive filth.  

Onward through our fog!
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #2 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:54

    
The end of 2018 found me doing more travel than I've ever done in my
life.  I was in Seattle, San Francisco, Los Angeles,  Berlin, Riga,
Tallinn, Amsterdam, Copenhagen, Bangalore -- and Austin of course,
Turin of course, Belgrade of course.  I did these visits in no
particular order, sometimes repeating them, plus a whole bunch of
roadside burgs all over the American Southwest, because I couldn't
resist driving in America.

     So 2018  was an apotheosis of my live-out-of-a-bag,
twenty-first century, digital nomad lifestyle.  It was sheer 
Kerouac ON THE ROAD excess, even; I travelled so far and fast that I
couldn't even take proper pictures.

      I chose that kind of life,  and it suited me well, but I doubt
that I will ever travel that much again.  I'm a person at ease in
transit, I got useful things done on the road and I even felt
energized at the end of it, but that was enough.   So 2019 marks a
personal transition for me; I'm just not gonna lift and drop the
bags that much.

       I ended up here in Ibiza (not exactly a hardship posting). 
It's the exact same place that I was during last year's State of the
World, back in antique 2018.   I have no return ticket from Ibiza --
and I've been here a couple of weeks and more -- so I should
probably admit that I'm living here.  I'm getting some creative
writing done,  in a contemplative, less antic fashion, and I feel
perkier here than I do in my customary haunts of Austin, Turin and
Belgrade.  

     They are three cities that all suit my temperament, and I learn
a lot about the state of the world by methodically comparing them. 
But, frankly, their air pollution of all three of them is doing me
in.  They're three energetic but rather dirty towns,  especially in
winter.   I'm not yet reduced to the tubercular state of Robert
Louis Stevenson retreating to Samoa, but I can see that prospect
clearly.   If, as a man over 60,  I can no longer breathe tainted
air, I'm not gonna lie about that.  That's a crass act of self-harm.
That's like ignoring global warming; a sensible person just doesn't
do that.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #3 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:55

    

    So I travelled quite a lot in late 2018, but I found pretty much
the same mood, spread worldwide.   It's the "new dark."   Tallinn
and Bangalore were were  the brighter standouts -- more energetic,
more sense of get-up and go -- but there's just not much twinkly,
sparkly social energy out there.  

      It's gray, it's becalmed.  It's not a fatal gloom, but it is a
kind of learned-helplessness, a malaise and bewilderment. It's  very
much the attitude of people who sign onto Facebook 'cause they can't
yet figure out any other way to live.  They do that, because they
must conform to the apparent need,  despite their vague oxlike
awareness that they're being spied on, tricked, and defrauded.   

      This is the resigned malaise  that fits the post-Snowden
Internet and  tech industry's consolidation.  It's the funereal
aftermath of Moore's Law.  It resembles a fat, sweaty guy on the
couch snacking on poisoned cookies.  That's how it is.

      With all that admitted, though, among this global weltschmerz
there's a strange undercurrent of people who are personally having a
pretty good time.  There's fire under the ash.  People are not in a
morbid, overwrought despair; on the contrary, the streets look
well-ordered, people are better-dressed, the birth rate is up a
little....  They may not have dependable jobs, or a retirement plan,
but they've hit on routines, of a sort.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #4 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:55

    
      The street-scenes in Bangalore were extraordinary.  Indian
life is still very hard-scrabble, but it's like the bazaars are on
steroids.  That's not Western economic development, but it's sure as
hell not abject Indian urban poverty:   it's novel,
Post-Third-World, proletarian, tech-inflected energy, humble yet
seething thickly, full of sustenance; its like watching oatmeal
boiling.  Maybe it's  the relative youth of the Indian population,
but if you compare that vivid sidewalk commerce to the storefronts
in Europe now, it's like watching people selling gentleman's canes.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #5 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:57

    
     I'm here in Ibiza with no plans to depart.  Thanks to the
cut-rate tourist airlines, I can be  back in Turin for 30 bucks. 
However, it's not like I'm ducking out on 2019 in a stoner
Lotusland.  On the contrary, I'm figuring Ibiza for an economic
blast-zone for Brexit, this March.   This Spanish island is very
Briticized -- not as much as Gibraltar, admittedly, but right on up
there -- and the British are about to place themselves under
unilateral economic sanctions.  They've been at this weird ambition
for years, and 2019 is when it comes due.

     Since I do hang out in Belgrade, I have a pretty good idea of
what economic sanctions can do to people and their societies.   And
yeah, the lack of trade agreements will probably deal with that
immigration free-movement problem they think they have.   That
annoying flow of job-stealing migrants, and the free-spending
tourists, are both gonna vanish like the dew, because there's no
genuine difference: they're both human meat on the hoof.  

       Sanctions against world trade are very effective, if you
really, really want to carve a place like Yugoslavia into
quarrelling micronational bits.  That this fate would happen, by
choice, to a nuclear power that's a permanent member of the UN
Security Council, well, that's pretty interesting.   Not the
bureaucratic process, what is boring, but what it does to people
inside: getting balkanized.

      I sure wouldn't wanna be trapped inside that situation -- 
because in 2018, the British were the gloomiest and doomiest that
I've ever seen 'em.  They all know they're about to pound nails
through their naked feet with big hammers.  I reckon that Ibiza will
be an interesting ringside seat for that.

      The markets are holding their breath for that development. 
The markets are in bearish decline now, but it's no use getting all
worked up during the preliminary phony-war.  The markets are waiting
for the markets to stop being global markets.

       That effect may not be as savage as the British Remainers
want to paint it.  Plenty of small nations exist on the rim of the
EU.  They don't thrive, exactly -- mostly, because they're so
corrupt and parochial -- but they more or less get along in life.  
It's not like the placid, elderly Europeans will bother to invade
and kill you.  

      Also, the World Trade Organization is about to collapse,
because Trump can't be bothered to appoint anybody to it, and there
are trade-wars spreading hither and you.  So Britain will not become
an overnight economic leper -- the whole planet's gonna be screwed
up.

       The best-case scenario is that they somehow Brexit, and
there's no coherent response from anybody -- just, nobody left to
inspect all the lorries; the alleged hard Irish Border is as silly
at the Trump Wall, the emigres cruelly forced out are thousands
instead of millions, the restive banks decide to hang on  a few more
years, and so on.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #6 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:57

    

        The worst-case scenario for a modern European rim country is
Ukraine.  That is the EU-Russia shatterbelt where the elderly
village grannies, the last ones too poor to flee, are harvesting
their turnips while  getting randomly pounded by mortar fire.  There
is no true war-front there, with any genuine military tactics or
strategy, no defeat, no victory.  Basically, it's covert operatives
from hundreds of kilometers away pay jobless young men to blow up
their own country with loaned heavy-weapons.  Very like
election-meddling, but with howitzers.

       I'm not predicting that Britain will become a bloody
shatterbelt of car-bombing mini-Irelands, but that is a scenario. 
Nobody expected that from the Ukraine, either.  Or Yugoslavia.

       I would point out, if it helps any, that this worst-case
scenario is, historically,  not that severe.   If you compare the
Russia/Ukraine "Hot Peace" to the massive depredations there of one
hundred years ago, the Czarist White Terror, Trotsky on the armored
propaganda trains, it's mild.  

       People die, in thousands, but people in that war aren't
starving.  They don't even die of typhus or Spanish flu.   There are
no mass liquidation camps, the populations aren't ethnically
cleansed, Cossacks are around yet Jews go unnoticed, even (sort of).


      Ukraine's unsought war has been forced on it for half a
decade, but it's a more ulceration compared to a great world war.  
Syria is much crueller, because there are angrier crabs in that
basket, but Ukraine is typical of our times.  It's the patient zero
for the actual trouble.  The prospects for real peace there are very
slim.  The prospects of that kind of offshored Violence Lite
appearing elsewhere, those are high.

     This is especially true if the USA transforms into the Trump
Towers All-White Gated Community.  Then the Bush New World Order
will look in the mirror and see itself as it is nowadays, merely a
Trump branded, dodgy, break-the-bank hotel and casino project.    I
don't wanna go on and on about The Donald this year -- because he
bores and disgusts people now, which is a good sign -- but if
"everything Trump touches dies," then American military hegemony is
a likely casualty.  And where does Hot Peace break out after that? 
Pretty much anywhere.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #7 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:57

    
        I do have one self-set task for the SoTW this year.  What is
the forthcoming shape of the 2020s>   Moore's Law is dead, there's
no Singularity, the fix is in tech oligarchs of (take a breath) 
Google Apple Facebook Amazon Microsoft Baidu Alibaba Tencent Netflix
Samsung.  They're in charge, but they're sitting on heaps of cash
with nothing much to do with it.  

         So what does post-disruption, post-Moore's Law,
tech-industry consolidation look and feel like?   What kind of world
is that, what matters to people who live then?  What happens when
there's no Next Big Thing, and you live in a New-Dark Hot-Peace? 
What do people do with their time, their ambitions -- just tremble
at the Greenhouse thunderstorms?   They're bound to be up to
something.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #8 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:58

    

      I'm somebody who was close to pioneers in this multi-decade
effort to digitize our planet, but I know that it's old-fashioned
now.  I can even perceive my 90s-style, live out a laptop bag
lifestyle as a major component of today's social problems.   I don't
wanna scourge myself for  being an unconscionable Uber-AirBnB
cosmopolitan-globalized troublemaker, but I don't have to.  I can
just scourge all the rest of em, because I see 'em wherever I go.

      Austin, Turin, even Belgrade, and Ibiza, of course, 105
percent Ibiza -- the global nomads there are thicker than fleas.  
This is what the Left (especially the Spanish Left over in
Barcelona) calls "overtourism."  For everybody else, it's just
common-or-garden Build the Wall ethno-nationalism.   A typical,
contemporary, visceral emotional reaction to a world where money and
data flow around through crooked laundries and human flesh finds
strange methods to follow.  The Westphalian order doesn't like that.
It really got under their skin.

     Nobody seems to have a clue about what to do about it, except
maybe the Chinese, who do have a clear strategy: tightly controlled
National Sovereign Cyberspace complete with Moslem digital
tracking-camps, with a network of Belt and Road tentacles to sop up
global resources and markets.  
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #9 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:58

    

      Not everybody else can do as the Chinese do, though.  They
lack China's boldness and huge resources.  Our world's very crowded
in 2019.   There are sixty million refugees, nobody flings opens
their arms to new settlers of a nonexistent wilderness.  

    The wild card in the migrant panic is the  huge internal
population displacements from climate change.  Just: whole towns
gone overnight, Paradise California; swarms of Neo-Okies leaving the
dustbowls in their Teslas.  

     The true bitterness in today anti-migrant, anti-tourist
sentiment is people's fearful awareness that they might become a
refugee, whether they like it or not.  And, once you're uprooted,
your baby's heading for baby jail, because you built one yourself.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #10 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 19 06:59

    
     So, I hope that sets the stage.  What seems to  me to be
missing now is not more technological solutionism -- we've kind of
had enough too-clever disruption stunts -- but some humanistic
concurrence on what a modern civilization ought to look like when
nobody's  much impressed by the hardware any more.  

     One of the few guys I know who is effectively chipping away at
this conundrum is James Bridle.

      That's why I requested Mr Bridle to join us this year.  James
Bridle is an artist, editor, publisher and the author of "New Dark
Age: Technology and the End of the Future," a tome I pored over with
keen interest because, at its basis, it's a book about knowledge:
the difficulty of figuring out what's going on.  Its title may sound
a tad cyberpunk-dystopian, but I have to say that the prospect of
James's "New Dark" actually cheers me up some.  Given that you know
there's a "New Dark," and what aspects of novelty that darkness has,
that implies the cheery potential of a New Light, assuming that you
could figure that out, somehow.  

     The new enlightenment for the new dark age; even if it's just a
modest puddle of candlelight, next to the newly squeegeed window,
that's not such a bad thing.  Makes you want to unstack the
injection-molded plastic chairs and set out a plate of legalized
hash brownies, since that's the kind of thing grandma eats nowadays.


Let's get right after it, shall we?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #11 of 231: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 1 Jan 19 12:41

    
Not too many neo-Okies left Paradise in Teslas.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #12 of 231: Ari Davidow (ari) Tue 1 Jan 19 12:53

    
Interesting. Residents of Paradise, CA, are mostly poor. Unlike
refugees from hurricane Katrina, they are mostly white, so that
gives them some advantages. But it occurs to me that one result of
climate change is the central american refugees on the US border.
The other is the growing swath of poor affected by water, fire,
collapsing infrastructure in this country. Okay, collapsing
infrastructure isn’t, mostly, climate change related. It’s our
retreat from the idea that people who got economically lucky need to
pay a fair share.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #13 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 19 15:25

    
Unlike Bruce, I wasn't traveling in 2018. Unlike many my age, I
haven't retired, I'm still focused on work, and digging it. I'm part
of a worker-owned cooperative web development company, also active
as a member of a decades-old activist organization committed to
digital freedom. And I'm co-producing podcasts with a colleague from
my home town, someone I've known for over six decades. I have deep
roots and well-established endeavors.

I haven't been writing much lately - I'm blocked. I still have a
creative flow of ideas that could become written works, but I can't
give weight to any one idea sufficient to flesh it out, and I avoid
deep investigation in favor of drive by posts, skimming the surfaces
of ideas.  The firehose of online information and the siren song of
social media have disrupted my focus.  My memory is not as reliable
and sharp as it was when I was younger, but I can't say whether this
is an effect of age or of long-term exposure to the
attention-disrupting effects of a life spent mostly online.

I think the latter. Recently I've stopped focusing on social media.
I've come back to the WELL, where there is a sense of community and
a persistence of real, focused conversations.  When I started
participating here again, it was obvious to me that the way I was
using online resources had contributed to a lack of focus and a
deficit of attention. I initially had trouble following
conversations that involved longer sentences, paragraphs, and
patterns of thought. I had to convert bounce to flow.

I can't help but think this is a crucial year. The true State of the
World is complex and confusing, an elephant for the blind, a crazy
quilt of conceptions and perceptions increasingly unreported, or
under-reported, by market-driven journalists. Unreliable, biased and
polarized cable news is the primary source of perspective for so
many increasingly wired netizens, consequently they are politicized
beyond reason, at war with the ghosts of ideas. 

But I probably don't get out enough.  Last night we brought in the
new year at a rustic rural bar with soundtrack by a great Tom Petty
cover band, among people who were joyously drinking, dancing,
smiling and laughing. No confusion there, we knew what we were
about. It was a hopeful moment, really - how could such a
rambunctious and happy bunch of people settle for collapse,
extinction?  I have come to believe that climate change and
environmental collapse are beyond fixing - that extinction of homo
sapiens is a not just possible, but a probable outcome.  But today
I'm feeling hopeful.

My horoscope for the week, via Rob Breszny's Free Will Astrology
(https://www.freewillastrology.com/horoscopes/taurus.html): "The
night parrots of Australia are so elusive  that there was a nearly
six-decade stretch when no human saw a single  member of the
species. But in 2013, after searching for 15 years,  photographer
John Young spotted one and recorded a 17-second video.  Since then,
more sightings have occurred. According to my astrological  vision,
your life in 2019 will feature experiences akin to the story of the 
night parrot's reappearance. A major riddle will be at least
partially solved.  Hidden beauty will materialize. Long-secret
phenomena will no longer be  secret. A missing link will re-emerge."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #14 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 1 Jan 19 19:36

    


"Hidden beauty will rematerialize." 

let us make that the mantra of 2019. 

thank you, bruce and jon, for inviting me to be a special SOTW guest this
year. 

first, let me respond to a couple things y'all mentioned. New-Dark
Hot-Peace sounds about right to me (though i haven't read Bridle's book
yet). bruce, your image of " The new enlightenment for the new dark age;
even if it's just a modest puddle of candlelight" really shines for me.
that's how the last almost-three years of my life have felt. 

my family left our comfy liberal bubble city. we lived on the road and
tucked away in national forests and campgrounds for six months, with a tiny
16-foot travel trailer, usually off-grid. technology enabled this
adventure, as my husband and i could work on the road and keep in touch
with folks elsewhere... but the grip of its tentacles felt more pronounced
the longer we traveled and camped. "off-grid" became not-quite-good-enough. 
sometimes we need to get far away from wi-fi and cell service, too. 

we bounced between furnished rentals and living on the road for a couple
years. when we were settled, it was near a very small town in the
middle of Oregon: in the pines at the feet of great volcanoes, on the seam
between the high desert with its ranches and Trump-Pence banners, and the
hidden mountain world that gives way, if you travel west, to the Willamette
Valley's lush jungles of grey-and-green, its college towns and ageing
communes. 

that first winter we had four feet of snow on the ground for four months --
unusual for this area. we were strangers in a strange land (that had indeed
voted majority Trump, at 49%), everyone stir crazy, many of us processing
the horror and bizarrety of the 2016 election. for me, this meant going
extremely dark, going way into my own ugly dark little heart, into the
shadows, exploring just how radically closed-minded i had become,
acknowledging how i and my compatriots had helped push our country to this
insane brink. 

we had become the polarization, and we had exacerbated it. it sounds easy,
typing it into The Well right now... it was not easy to excavate my own
depths and actually admit these truths on a deep, emotional level. it
implied that i had to *change*. so i've been working on that ever since. 

eventually i deleted all my social media accounts as part of this effort.
meditating, spending huge amounts of time in nature, mostly alone, but also
organizing small gatherings and rituals in the woods -- i sank into my own
personal little Dark Age. i sought out "modest puddle of candlelight"
instead of the liquid blue light of my phone and computer. 

OK, i'm exaggerating. i'm still online and still rely on screens for my
income. i still rely on The Well for incredible community, far-flung and
blissfully lacking a "like" button. but i found that i *needed* darkness.
without it, the beauty of candlelight had been lost. i wanted the modest
puddle and the dark, both. i got them. and i feel incalculably better, more
whole, less fragmented. maybe even slightly less full of shit! 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #15 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 1 Jan 19 19:54

    

i spent much of 2017 wrestling with my relationship to technology, if we
can even really call that abusive push-pull a "relationship." i'd been a
Facebook addict for years, but the dismay and hideousness it now inspired
in me? too much to handle. apparently the algorithm liked me liberal,
progressive, feminist, and in constant conflict, though sometimes the ads
it served me made it clear *someone* actually believed i was an 85-year-old
man, as i'd typed in when i signed up. 

so i started a second account. a mild one where i could friend my many
Christian cousins, and my new local community, which as mentioned above
went 49% Trump. (43% Hilary, 8% other). this was a whole different world.
living my two lives side-by-side proved quite revealing. in order to leave
the liberal bubble and learn from the experience, i'd have to leave my
Facebook world, too. 

i used Patreon to create an experiment for dealing with Facebook, politics,
media, and social media. it was private, supported by a handful of friends,
and proved very fruitful. i wound up with a system for interrogating my
tech habits and changing them, along with ... my mind, i guess. it's no
coincidence that i ended up changing my diet, giving up alcohol entirely,
and going head-on with severe chronic illness problems.

that catches me up to 2018. by now, i could feel the strength and promise
of these changes. we'd bought a house and settled down, though we
still headed out for month-long trips in the RPod, our little trailer.
reducing tech and increasing my time in nature helped bring my writing back
into focus. in 2018, i deleted all my social without much problem. i wrote
tons of poetry, started playing piano again, got my first artist's
residency in ten years. community journalism called to me and i wrote a
bunch of fun, micro-local articles for not a lot of money... but oh, i love
it. i also jumped back into the fray of larger marketing and branding
projects, including a former client that is arguably one of the greatest
brands in the world. my political activism streak took new, firmly local,
and perhaps more meaningful turns.

the world around me, as bruce describes in his travels, seemed to be in a
dark place in 2018... yet like those he describes, i was having a pretty
good time.

this is all quite personal, but hey, the personal is political. that never
changes. context is needed. without it, we are just blathering,
self-appointed "experts". 

my son is in second grade now, and he's been running in here every ten
minutes, angry that i keep saying, "i'll be done in ten minutes." i ain't
done. he's right to be angry. 

i'm going to close the lid on this MacBook Pro. it's going to make a
satisfying snap. i'm going to walk away from this SOTW discussion before
i've even made my damned point. my son will have my full attention.

so i'll make this fast. five, six years ago, i believed we were in an
epistemological crisis -- a crisis of knowledge, trust, and belief. 

now i believe we are in a crisis of meaning. that it drives people to
puddles of darkness and candlelight may prove to be a salvation of sorts. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #16 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 19 02:00

    

https://www.gatesnotes.com/About-Bill-Gates/Year-in-Review-2018

Here in 2019, there are more Americans alive over 60 than Americans
who are under 18.  So for a brisk, road-ahead, forward-looking
viewpoint,  it might be time for us to check in with that
widely-noted retired guy, Bill Gates.

Despite his advancing years, Mr Gates hardcore grinds it out more in
a week than I ever do in a year.  And, although he's not a facile
TED-talk optimist, he's always got his eye on the deliverable. 
That's why it's a little weird to see him tacitly admitting so much
defeat in his recent screed.

To begin, Bill quotes his best pal Warren Buffett, claiming that the
bottom line of human good behavior is "Do the people you care about
love you back?"  This seems an odd scheme to promote, considering
the Sage of Omaha's polygamous lifestyle.  Buffett's motto should
have been, "If your wife leaves for California and sends her best
friend over instead, go for that." Let's hope they were all happier.

Then there's this prediction: "software will be able to notice when
you’re feeling down, connect you with your friends, give you
personalized tips for sleeping and eating better."  Something
downright ominous here, because obviously Gates is tacitly conceding
that it's not your nearest and dearest but rather  the *software*
that ought to be caring about you and loving you back.  

First, I don't think that's ever gonna work.  Second, I'm getting
concerned about Bill's mood.  Is he so personally unhappy now that
he would want to digitally monitor his own mental state?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #17 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 19 02:01

    

Then Bill frets at length about Alzheimer's Disease, and although
that's indeed a huge scourge, malaria-sized, and obviously the sort
of thing that a medical philanthropist ought to tackle, I get the
impression that Bill is mostly worried about *his own* Alzheimer's. 
He talks about boosting the brain's mitochondria, while there's
about a zillion neutraceutical pills on the market already that do
this  right now.  I have to wonder if maybe Bill's eating those
pills.  Not, like, big Ray Kurzweil double-handfuls of them, I hope.

Then polio, which ought to be as extinct as smallpox, only it's
making a resurgence in Afghanistan and Pakistan because the Terror
is winning the Global War on Terror.  "The global health community
is finding creative ways to work in war zones."  Is that good news
for everybody, Bill?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #18 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 19 02:02

    

Then, since Bill's never been stupid, he gets it about global
warming.  But then, for some reason, he's suddenly keen on nuclear. 
There's lots of tech guys keen on nuclear, for decades.  Not a lot
of 'em left in Fukushima or Chernobyl.  

Also, pitching a lot of nuclear into a world beset with Balkanized
ethnonationalism -- in particular, American nuclear, Bill says. 
Donald Trump doesn't have enough nukes?

      I'm not, personally, like, hot under the collar antinuclear,
but if Bill wants to dream big about this, why not cold fusion?  
That way he wouldn't have to fret about people demanding that he
store his spent fuel rods in Redmond.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #19 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 19 02:02

    

     Then Bill wraps up the year 2018 by speculating that Spanish
flu could briskly kill half of everybody, and also that rampant
off-the-books gene-editing is busting loose all over.  

        Then, finally, "Melinda and I are working on our next Annual
Letter. The theme is a surprise, though it is safe to say we’ll be
sharing some positive trends that make us optimistic about the
future."  

     Why does Bill even have to say that bullshit?  It's because
he's got nothing that he's genuinely enthusiastic about, that's why
he says it.  Whenever people are truly positive, they never whine
about how, just any minute now, they're gonna lift their sorry heads
and  say something positive.   "I'm not gonna be depressed about it,
I'm gonna say something really upbeat here," that never works!  It's
like a poker tell, something Bill ought to get since he plays so
much poker.

     You can't scold yourself about not talking properly, you have
to take action in some aspect of life that actually makes you
enthusiastic.  Then you don't have to tell people that you and the
wife will be cheerful any minute now.  If you're really making any
headway, people will show up on their own.  You'll have to chase 'em
off with a stick.

     In any case, this new-dark malaise I was talking about earlier?
He's got it.  Yeah, even him.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #20 of 231: Alex Davie (icenine) Wed 2 Jan 19 06:46

    
A brief introduction and onto my comment:
Retired in March 2015 as construction/project manager from a career
that included environmental remediation to hazardous materials
release emergency response to my final six years spent moving 22
million cubic yards of dirt (among other tasks) to facilitate the
building of two new nuke reactors near Augusta, Georgia
Since becoming funemployed in March, 2015, we have traveled
extensively across America in a motorhome, visiting friends and
family, investing in our health and generally just hanging out in
our home an hour Northeast of Atlanta, Georgia.
Upon returning home after six years (we rented a house near the nuke
project for the duration), I found our County being developed in an
unhealthy manner and decided to get involved so I started to pay
attention to local County groups fighting the massive
overdevelopment of our once rural, bucolic and beautiful area.
That led to me finding another geezer who was interested in
reconstituting the Libertarian Party in our County so we did and
thru no fault of my own or election by the membership, I became
Chairman when the presiding Chair, a Venezuelan woman bolted for
reasons that still are unclear. As a final aside, I have voted
Libertarian since 1976 when I discovered the Libertarians in Austin,
Texas where I was an undergraduate.

Comment:
Tiff kinda nailed it for me when she talked about local politics and
how that has become a way for her to lend her energy to and Bruce
hit it on the head for me when he talked about the candlelight in
the 'New Dark". I have been passionate about politics since I was 13
years old and and JFK was assassinated and I was living in
Manhattan, NY. So for me, to light that candle in my local County,
it appears that I have chosen to become active in the hyper-local
politics of my County. I was asked to become a Citizen Stakeholder
by my County District Commissioner which involves attending public
zoning meetings and engaging citizens on a one-to-one basis
extending my District Commissioners reach by reporting back on my
outreach experience with the citizens of the County.

So, concluding, I live here and care about how this County is
developing and chose to spend my time interacting with the people
that live here with me thru the Libertarian Party and by being an
advocate and conduit for the citizens of this County to make their
wishes and desires known to the political structure.
Thanking y'all for this SOTW...I read it every year and have only
lurked to date. As Bruce said and as Oat Willie said before him:
Onwards, thru the fog! And Onwards thru our fog
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #21 of 231: Administrivia (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 19 08:11

    
Most discussions on the WELL require membership, but this discussion
is world-readable. Short url for access is:

http://bit.ly/stateoftheworld2019  

Feel free to spread the word! 

Only members of the WELL can post directly to the conversation. If
you're not a member of the WELL but have something you want to ask
or contribute, email it to inkwell at well.com. Hosts will review
incoming email, and can post reasonable incoming messages here as
part of the conversation.

If you're interested in having conversations like this every day in
a real online community, vs. the semi-social sharing via corporate
platforms like Facebook and Twitter, consider joining the WELL:
https://www.well.com/join/
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #22 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Wed 2 Jan 19 11:40

    
First of all, thanks to Jon and Bruce for inviting me, and everyone
at the Well for having me. I've been reading SoTW for a very long
time, and it and the Well hold a pretty special place for me as
someone who grew up with, and on, the internet, just sneaking online
before the web exploded, and riding the wave of it ever since. It's
an honour and a privilege to be here.

The last year or so has been weirder than any preceding it, and I
expect the trend to continue. I always wanted to write a book about
the internet, and while sidetracked by art and other projects, I
finally managed to publish it in 2018 - but it wasn't the book I
expected to write. Gestated in the months between the Brexit
referendum and the Trump election, and fed by far too much time
spent thinking about the technologies of surveillance capitalism and
military intelligence, it came out a lot darker than I or anyone I
know would have suspected. But I'll repeat the 1915 line from
Virginia Woolf I quoted in the introduction to that book (and which
I took from Rebecca Solnit's exemplary 'Hope in the Dark', also
recommended): "the future is dark, which is the best thing the
future can be, I think."

I don't, fwiw, think that a new enlightenment is what's coming down
- nor an endarkenment, as plenty of nasty folk would have it. I
think entanglement is closer, which won't get disentangled or
enlightened or explained or understood any time soon. We're going to
have to go deep into the living of this thing for a long while yet,
without the crutch of exegesis.

Like Bruce, the start of 2019 finds me at the end of a period of
pretty intense travel, which I know I both should and need to
mitigate. I'm incredibly lucky to be able to travel the world -
mostly Europe, occasionally further - as I do, but I don't see the
situation being mentally, financially, morally, or even physically
sustainable in the not-very-long-term, and other plans are
necessary.

Following 2017/18's focus on everything that's grim in the world,
I'm making a fairly concerted effort to turn my focus towards other
outcomes: not solutions, but areas which need our attention, pretty
desperately. And they seem to contain interesting things. I'm
talking to ecologists around the Mediterranean who have a far
clearer view of the world than most techs and futurologists. I'm
spending more time in weird, niche communities - antisocial media,
distributed and federated services, truly decentralised ones as well
as real urban anarchists - and they feel like different places to
talk about power and agency, and formulate strategy. I started the
year giving a TED talk (mostly) about child abuse on YouTube and
finished it making a film about flamingos, and I like that
trajectory.

Three years ago we moved to Athens, Greece, by accident. Came for a
month or two, and haven't left. Got mixed up in things. Made a home
- despite the travel pressures of work. Most people come to Greece
to see the past, but I keep telling people, only half-jokingly,
half-shamedly, that it's the future. The twin crises of financial
collapse and (increasingly climate-driven) mass irregular movement
are coming for everywhere, and Greece has been at the front line for
a decade now. More places are going to look like this.

One of my guiding texts for the last couple of years has been Amitav
Ghosh's 'The Great Derangement' (maybe that's better than
Entanglement too). Among other things in the book, Ghosh says
something quite revelatory about time: he notes that it has changed
direction. Under modernity, time was produced in the Metropolitan
centre, and trickled out to the periphery. Now, like colonial
violence, it's returning to the centre, and the things and people at
the edges are those who are living in the future. The deep ocean,
the desert, the coastlines and the tundra: it's in the most distant
places that the effects of the hotter, wetter, more entangled and
deranged future are being felt first, but they're coming for all of
us, and sooner than we think. (I have more diagrams on this.)

I returned briefly to London for Christmas, and landed at Gatwick a
few hours before the drones (maybe?) took down Airstrip One's second
busiest airport for 36 hours (shh, others have already made the
jokes). It felt like a cyberattack: deniable, apparently harmless,
virtually devastating, infrastructure-targetted, impossible to
defend against, and - most significantly - weird af. This is the era
of weird terrorism as well as weird everything else. A lot of people
thought it was a Brexit protest. Maybe it was.

I'm a Brit living on the south coast of Europe. Looking at what's
going on all over right now it seems fairly clear that the walls are
going to come down, and I and a few billion other people are going
to be on the wrong side of them. I don't know much but tech, but I
read a lot. I'm spending a lot more time outdoors and up mountains,
but I'm not planning on leaving. I'm looking forward to this
conversation, and I am planning furiously. Happy New Year.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #23 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Wed 2 Jan 19 12:10

    


>  Tiff kinda nailed it for me when she talked about local politics 

thanks, <icenine>. i didn't realize you were involved in environmental
remediation to hazardous materials and nuclear plant building projects. 

from that perspective, where do you think we stand in 2019, in our case as
Americans, or as citizens of the world? do you think we understand what
environmental remediation really is, and do we have a firm grasp on what
needs to be remediated?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #24 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Wed 2 Jan 19 12:15

    



Bruce, Bill Gates does sound a bit sad and desperate there. His comment
about software/AI becoming responsible for monitoring our moods and 
wellness (if i might paraphrase) is ominous indeed. Sherry Turkle at MIT
writes and talks about the issues -- deep problems and shallow, obvious
ones alike -- created by switching our attention from real-life humans to
robots, toys, and digitally mediated communication. Any thoughts on that? 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #25 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Wed 2 Jan 19 12:27

    


James Bridle, nice to meet you. for years, i've been struggling with the
fact that i love to travel, but travel is unsustainable, as you put it. for
your own personal life have you come up with ideas about how to limit
travel or make it less environmentally problematic?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #26 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 19 14:17

    
After I turned 60, my memory became less sharp and reliable than it
had been, but I could see that happening to others who were growing
older, as well. But I'm not clear that the fog is attributable
strictly to advancing age and consequent cognitive decline. I also
had a worsening attention deficit that seemed related to the memory
issues, and was almost certainly related to my persistent
focus-challenging online activity. I stopped checking alzheimer's
symptoms to remind myself that I wasn't on that path, instead taking
a critical look at my websurfing habits.

Now I'm convinced that whatever cognitive issues I've experienced
derive in large part from effects of a life spent mostly online. And
I suspect that's true of Bill Gates, who at 63 is aging and
experiencing some loss of memory, but who has almost certainly spent
a big part of his life experiencing the same Internet infoburst
syndrome.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #27 of 231: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Wed 2 Jan 19 15:52

    
I read that Gates wants software that will respond to our moods, and
I think of the robots that have been built to comfort elders. 
Scientists stand on the other side of a mirror and high five each
other when they learn that old people are grateful when they get a
little attention.  What if people comforted elders, if this kind of
caregiving were considered a high status well paid job instead of
being scutwork tossed to those most newly arrived from other
countries.  As robots move forward, not because we need them but
because Silicon Valley (where I live) can build them, we're going to
need to find new jobs for those whose occupations have been
eliminated. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #28 of 231: John Spears (banjojohn) Wed 2 Jan 19 16:19

    
I really don't look forward to being comforted by robots or having
my mood monitored by software. The world is already too dystopian
for my taste. For example, my software tells me I've misspelled
dystopian, but I disagree.  
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #29 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 2 Jan 19 21:47

    
<hosts, dont see a link to this from the well frontpage for folks
NOTW>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #30 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Thu 3 Jan 19 01:00

    
Hi Tiffany - nice to meet you too!

I don't have any good answer to the travel issue, other than
travelling less, at least by plane. The long answer thus involves
some kind of change of life, as it's not just a matter of travelling
differently to maintain the same lifestyle, but changing life plans
to live differently. 

In the short term, I have too many embedded plans - contracted gigs
(that I need the money from) as well as teaching commitments (at an
art school premised on travel, which pops up in a different European
country each month) - to make a big difference, but in the
medium-to-long-term I am making more plans to generate projects and
engagements locally, that will keep me in place in a fulfilling and
(mentally, financially) sustainable way.

In reckoning this question, I keep coming up against another of
those dichotomies that need breaking, between the local and the
global. I feel so many of us have taken the internet's injunction to
be everywhere at once as a personal challenge, and turned our lives
into reflections of the network: distributed and always in motion. I
think there must be something in between: a networked
cosmopolitanism, that allows us to properly engage without
stretching our bodies and the planet's resources to breaking point.

That word - cosmopolitan - is a tricky one. Theresa May, the British
PM, my PM, among many other terrible things, has stated that "if
you're a citizen of everywhere, you're a citizen of nowhere", a
jingoistic statement I instinctively rebel against - but of a piece
with her particular brand of nanny-state nationalism. (May is to
nationalism as Thatcher was to capitalism: no-nonsense,
authoritarian, and full TINA (there is no alternative)). At the same
time I'm cognisant that the kind of cosmopolitanism we've engendered
has made the same mistakes as the internet itself: it's never made
it it Stage C (Distributed) of the RAND/Baran network diagram,
getting stuck at Stage B (Decentralised). It includes the big cities
and the developed nations, but its made dependants at best most of
the rest of the world - the peripheries that I referred to
previously. A truly networked cosmopolitanism needs to be more
evenly distributed. It can be local without being parochial, which
is what many of us subconsciously fear.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #31 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Thu 3 Jan 19 01:22

    
To speak to memory slippage and attention fog...

My handle here - stml - is the diminutive of short term memory loss
- the first domain I registered almost twenty years ago. I used it
because that's what the internet felt like even then, something
fleeting and uncertain, subject to change and erasure. It still
does, in fact, except we've come to expect permanence and authority
from it, and perhaps dangerously so.

It's quite clear that many things being currently constructed, from
large-scale capitalist enterprises to social media timelines to
microinteractions on smartphone apps are specifically designed as
attacks on our ability to think clearly and act autonomously: "the
race to the bottom of the brain stem" as Tristan Harris puts it.
What you're feeling is not some weird emergent effect of too much
screen time: it's deliberate. (cf Jonathan Crary's "24/7: Late
Capitalism and the Ends of Sleep".)

If we acknowledge it as deliberate, we also empower ourselves to
counter it in meaningful and progressive ways - not going back to
the cave, and certainly not to Vipassana retreats in Myanmar, but by
reconstructing technologies that support rather than degrade
attention and thinking. Again, I'd point to those systems which
actively work towards true decentralisation, rather than mere
distribution (which, as we've seen, just concentrates power in
different hands). These technologies exist, in forms as obvious as
peer-to-peer video chat and the interplanetary file system, as well
as slower but more dispersed forms of social media.

They also emphasise trust and care in ways which are inimical to
fully marketised digital media, but must be foundational to whatever
comes next. The people working on those things, which include
schools, affinity networks, and residencies as well as software, are
the ones I'm watching most closely right now.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #32 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Thu 3 Jan 19 01:28

    
And I meant to add to the above: these forms of media are both
correlative and performative: that is, they change our behaviours as
they change the form of the network. You use different technologies
and you change the landscape and yourself, so this is one of many
answers to the travel as well as the attention question.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #33 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:07

    
*Here in the WELL SoTW, we’re not alone in our apparent urge to drop
Facebook and flee headlong to the polar tundra.  Check out this 
recent WIRED magazine article.  When even WIRED doesn’t wanna be
wired any more, man, who is left to cheer on the tech-scene?

https://www.wired.com/2017/01/how-i-got-my-attention-back/


“I want my attention back.

“Did I really have it before Facebook? Thinking back, the early
versions of Facebook were adorable. Benign. No tagging. No
timelines. Just The Wall. A way to say — Hey, what’s shaking dorm
buddy? Poke. No algorithms. A human scale.

“The more I thought about my attention the more I thought about the
limits to human scale. How technologies inevitably amplify ourselves
— the best and worst parts — in a way that is almost impossible for
us to comprehend….”
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #34 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:10

    


*Call me sentimental, but I really hate to see WIRED writers suffer.
The thing is, though -- I’m not sure it’s all that hard “to
comprehend.”   I’m thinking that maybe we’re just unwilling to do
the work of comprehension.

*Once the tech-glamour novelty fades, it’s kinda easy to comprehend.
Pretending that it’s all Singularity-like and brain-boggling is a
cheesy evasion.   It’s like comprehending Virtual Reality.  VR seems
more important than the discovery of fire the first time it’s
clamped on your head (especially if you’re on acid).  But that
thrill fades about as fast as the thrill of 3D movies.

*It Tiffany is right and Facebook has become a thing of “dismay and
hideousness,” then what part is the dismay and what part is the
hideous?  You can get over the dismay.  The hideous, that really
lasts.

*So I’m thinking the aesthetics is the key here.  Because if “the
hidden beauty will rematerialize,” which is a lovely rallying slogan
that I like quite a lot,  what would that beauty look like?  When it
came out of hiding, how would we know it was beautiful?  We don’t
exactly need a “new aesthetic” to know that, because wrinkled old
Dorian Gray Facebook isn’t all that new any more, but we do need an
aesthetic, because an aesthetic is how you convince other people
that the beauty has arrived. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #35 of 231: Alex Davie (icenine) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:29

    
Slippage while composing
Tiff:
”from that perspective, where do you think we stand in 2019, in our
case as
Americans, or as citizens of the world? do you think we understand
what
environmental remediation really is, and do we have a firm grasp on
what
needs to be remediated?”

When I started performing environmental remediation projects across
the Midwest in early 1986, I believed that my work managing
environmental remediation projects was directly healing Mother Earth
by removing hazardous chemicals and materials from the soil and
water and disposing of the extracted haz-mat properly and would
unabashedly tell people that when it would come up in conversations.


Over the years, we, as a nation, have cleaned up the worst and
largest of these depredations and have moved to smaller and smaller
projects where the clean-ups are more elusive and in some ways, more
intractable but we continue to do it (large and small) and we and
Mother Earth are the better for it. There are some contaminated
sites that we started back then and we are still pursuing clean-up
today in 2019, thirty years later.
And yes, in my mind, we do know what environmental remediation was
and is today. And that is the removal of large and small
contaminates from two media, soil and water. Air pollution, as Bruce
talks about is a whole different animal. But even there we have made
great progress but more can be done, here and abroad. 
And yes, we do have a firm grasp on what needs remediation today
based on our efforts, experience and research over the past 49 years
when the USEPA was formed and environmental remediation (soil, water
and air) began in earnest.

And this then takes me back to what I said earlier about local
political action and now citizen environmental awareness. Both of
those is how hundreds of connected (primarily social media)
concerned, local citizens rose up and protested the siting of a new
water treatment plant. The protest started small among neighbors who
spotted a surveyor, queried him and found out that without any
notice whatsoever, the County was buying 99 acres of raw, forested
land for the construction of a water treatment plant in their
”backyards". The upshot was that these concerned citizens, connected
by social media, packed to overflowing (SRO inside the hall and
watching on monitors in the lobby) a Townhall meeting hastily
convened by the County. This happened again when the County had
their formal and official meeting and these citizens forced the
County to abandon their purchase ($3M) of the 99 acres and look at
more appropriate sites in already industrial areas of the County.

So, as much as I see social media commoditizing, invading and
surveilling us, I have seen it put to beneficial use, locally and
globally. I have also, seen GAB, MINDS, MEWE, SPREELY, MASTODON and
others spring up to take in migrants from the aforementioned
omnivore social media platforms. I mention these new platforms with
no judgement but observing concerned citizens protesting and
refusing to participate in what these omnivores are doing to us. 

So in 2019, are these platforms with their promises of no ads, no
commodification and no surveillance of its participants going to
supplant the omnivores?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #36 of 231: gary b (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:38

    
We're starting to get comments and inquiries via email. The first,
from gary b, asks, simply:

if water is the new oil, just how screwed are we? 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #37 of 231: George McKee (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:43

    
Via email from George McKee:

So, the exponential phase of a logistic growth curve is tapering
off, and it's not so thrilling any more.  Good!  I have a couple of
comments and a question:

To put BruceS's European residences in a US perspective, the
distance between Ibiza and Turin is less than the distance between
Austin and El Paso.

Having worked for a paternalistic Fortune 50 company where "you have
no expectation of privacy in the office" is drummed into everyone, I
suspect that Bill Gates' musings about emotional regulation by AI
might come from Googlish or Facebookish thinking about what can be
done with all the data Microsoft has in the untold billions of
business emails and documents in Outlook and Office 365 clouds, and
their recent acquisition LinkedIn. Not to give them ideas, but
imagine the monetization opportunities if a company could learn by
textual analysis, not to mention speech patterns in Skype for
Business calls, that a key employee is having emotional problems
likely to affect their productivity or likelihood to jump ship. 
Subtle tuning of LinkedIn newsfeed article suggestions and reminders
of the corporate health plan's psychological services would be a
quite reasonable response.  The low-profile Amazon/Berkshire
Hathaway/Chase healthcare initiative has similar motivations and big
data exploitation capabilities.

In the big political picture, I sometimes wonder if we're seeing a
non-Marxian version of the nation-state withering away into
ineffective figurehead status, with lots of nationalist
grandstanding and soapboxing, but with increaingly autonomous
sprawl-class city-states having the real power, and between them
vast farming regions controlled by Big Ag, and depopulated
no-man's-lands making up the rest.  Key battlegrounds could be
tropical rainforests and Asian breadbaskets like Ukraine and
Georgia.  As usual, "follow the money": if the dollar gets displaced
as the global reserve currency by renminbi or World Bank SDRs or
Euros, look out!

Finally, my perennial media mortality and morbidity question.
Whither Facebook, Twitter, Snap? VR & AR, still coming or going?
What will be the long-term effect of #MeToo, if any?  Will CBS even
notice the departure of Les Moonves?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #38 of 231: Alex Davie (icenine) Thu 3 Jan 19 06:58

    
Slippage again while I was composing
Just read thru Bruce's comments and the Wired article and my first
reaction to the article and the author was:
 Get a grip and Jeez-O-fricking-Pete, get over yourself. Oh well, so
what that you are so addicted to your screen time that it took a
month in residency on a rural plantation so you could get your
attention back. Yikes, gimme a fookin' break! The author was talking
like he was powerless to resist the algos. Yeah, it is enticing but
WTF exercise some self-discipline and separate yourself from the
herd and your dopamine addiction. No sympathy for the devil here.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #39 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Thu 3 Jan 19 07:10

    
To some earlier comments, so just catching up. Thanks to Bruce and
Jon for doing this. I found Bruce’s comments on the “new dark” quite
interesting and insightful. 

I’m a member of a small group of Internet activists who tried to
shape the direction of the Net in the 90’s when it still could be
shaped. Sven Birkerts, Cliff Stoll and others were in this group. My
own approach was that of a middle path: tech has great promise so
let’s not screw it up. I wrote a book called “Digital Mythologies”
outlining this vision with some cautionary tales including several
essays about my experiences on the WELL.  (I think there might still
be an Inkwell session describing its genesis.) 

I still believe that the impressive array of technology we now
possess has great promise but much of it is hitched to the wrong
star: the excesses of a financial industry decoupled from and
oblivious to the concerns of ordinary Americans. This reality is
still not widely understood or reported on accurately in the
mainstream press.

The moment for steering towards something more consistent with the
need to “re-enchant the world” (as cultural historian Morris Berman
put it) has probably passed. Now we have to go backward to go
forward. People moving from Facebook to the WELL like Jon and myself
are a good example of this. (The WELL itself probably could have
been perfected but not improved if that makes sense.)

I’m very concerned about Gates’ pushing both nuclear energy and the
transhumanist vision of merging our emotional lives with computers.
There is a fundamental kind of dehumanizing force at work here,
figuratively and even literally in the semantic root sense of the
term. But if the singularity was really dead then I doubt people
like Gates would be pushing this macabre vision in which we
literally outsource the essence of our humanity – our emotional life
along with compassion and empathy  – to highly sophisticated
machines. In essence, doing so successfully would in my opinion
represent an abnegation of the very qualities that make us human,
almost an admission of failure and not its apotheosis in the march
of evolution seen from any number of philosophical, cultural or even
spiritual perspectives.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #40 of 231: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 3 Jan 19 07:33

    
Gates has always seemed to me to be a very bright well-read
dilettante.  An example: His major intervention in education based
on the idea that small high schools must be better than big ones. 
School districts from coast to coast (including the one I used to
teach at) jumped on board, in some cases aided by Gates Foundation
money.

Turned out there was nothing to it at all.

Oops.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #41 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Thu 3 Jan 19 08:03

    
I don't know about aesthetics - we seem characterised by an absence
of them. I'm thinking about the abundance of fake imagery/content
online (cf
https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2018/12/how-much-of-the-internet-is-fake.html or artist Jenny Odell's superlative https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/11/27/style/what-is-inside-this-inter
net-rabbit-hole.html), the prevalence of GAN-generated imagery producing alien otherworlds, and the dominance of deliberately obscure Gerasimov Doctrine warfare from "little green men" to cyberattacks, drones (military and civilian) and Swedish submarines - all absent real surfaces. Like the ecological hyperobject.

Surface, as we understand it, is specifically what's missing. Hence
the absence of aesthetics, and its uselessness as a concept to
address the now. Cybersecurity folk talk about "attack surfaces",
and we've lost contact with the attack surface of the present - all
smooth and uniform and strawberry as a friend once said of a
particularly intractable website design.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #42 of 231: Ari Davidow (ari) Thu 3 Jan 19 08:12

    
>[re small vs. large high schools] Turned out there was nothing to
it at all.

I just read a book from this past year in which the author seemed
quite convinced by the evidence in favor of that proposition,
<mcdee>. What studies lead you to believe that it is now debunked?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #43 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 08:23

    
Tom says that pervasive technologies of the network era are "hitched
to the wrong star: the excesses of a financial industry decoupled
from and oblivious to the concerns of ordinary Americans." He says
that mainstream media don't report this accurately. 

Of course they wouldn't, because it's "where they live." In the last
century journalism had evolved as a loss loser - e.g. television
network news divisions were operating as public service, not as
profit centers. Today mainstream journalism has become a profit
center, especially cable news. Accuracy is secondary to profit, and
there's an inherent blind spot about "excesses of a financial
industry." 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #44 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 3 Jan 19 08:46

    
a cranky hit and run; i dont usually bother but this time i will:

'all politics are local' and 'think globally, act locally'. these
ideas been around a  very long time.

and, ijwts, all i ever tried to write and say was that technology
will not change human nature (aggression, gamesmanship, opprtunities
for creative abuse). the advent of microprocessors sure didnt.

a weird sort of relief in that i no longer hear much the 'technology
will be our salvation'. seems to be more 'let's bug out to NZ — or
mars'.

also, 'travel' has become again a certain kind of class marker — and
also a marker for those who dont have caregiving responsibilities
-tying them down-. or (mostly) dont have disabilities themselves.
caregiving; disabilities; oh so not -interesting-. these are among
the perennials of the suffering human condition and i dont see
robots or IOT really addressing them other than in a pitchdeck.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #45 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Thu 3 Jan 19 08:56

    <scribbled by jonl Thu 3 Jan 19 10:47>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #46 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Thu 3 Jan 19 09:38

    
Aloha y'all, like a good futurist, I'm late to the party. Thanks Jon
and Bruce for letting me muddy the waters here. Howdy James and
Tiffany and WELL folks, and glad to be part of this always
stimulating conversation. 

I always assign the SOTW as one of the pre-readings for my strategic
foresight classes, so now my students can learn to be skeptical of
their professor before they step into the classroom. 

Bruce checking in from Ibiza is my jumping off point. My favorite
Orson Welles film, and required viewing for the 21st century IMO, is
'F for Fake'. Most of the film takes place in Ibiza in the 70s,
following two purveyors of fakes/ hoaxes, Elmyr de Hory and Clifford
Irving. One of the main takaways from the film is the fact that
experts are necessary for the success of a fake. That idea has now
become quaint as expertise is treated with scorn and suspicion.
George Wallace's "pointy headed-professors" line now metastasized
through New's York's version of George Wallace-- T***p. So, reality
is thoroughly negotiable, and experts can't be trusted. Fakes are
different now. They are not subversive, they are oppressive,
dangerous, violent, stupid. 

As a purveyor of experiential futures, where me and my
collaborators, especially Stuart Candy, have used many hoax devices
(not ATHF in Boston, but you know..) to get people to take
alternative futures seriously, I have had many ethical misgiving
about how design fiction, artifacts from the future, experiential
futures get deployed. As Bruce said not long ago, design fiction has
been weaponized. 

There is a profound difference between the Yes Men and Alex Jones.
No fan of the Yes Men has gone to a pizza parlor with an AK, but it
gets harder to use design fiction and artifacts from the future in a
naive way. This is our theater of operations now, and we have to
adjust. 

Fakes are only going to get worse, with deep fakes taking hold (in
porn first, of course). 2019 is training camp for deep fakes, 2020
will be the regular season. 

Check out my IFTF colleague Sam Woolley's work, as well as that of
Steve Duncombe at NYU, for two different angles on disinformation
and how we use spectacle and performance for "good."

I've been working with the Austin Civic Innovation Office and the US
Conference of Mayors over the last year (creating artifacts from the
future with 18 US Mayors, in fact). So the discussions on local
government and where power lies in the future is an important part
of my work and my thinking about the state of the world in 2019. 

I often start workshops by asking participants two questions: what
keeps you up at night? and what gets you out of bed in the morning?
So, I'll end this post with my own answers:

What keeps me up at night? The perturbations of complex society are
swinging more widely than ever, with no anchor to hold them steady.
In complex systems, when the perturbations get too large, the system
either transforms to a new phase, or it collapses. My fear, of
course, is collapse. And in the U.S. that means a very agitated,
well armed group of people taking their shit out on each other. 

What gets me up in the morning? The vacuum of leadership at the
global and national levels opens up an opportunity for local and
city-level power. After working with mayors of both parties, in
every region of the country, at different scales of size, I have
GREAT faith in city leaders right now, and can see a path forward
for global, cosmopolitan networks to get positive things done. 

More later on social invention, high wyrdness, and how we might move
forward. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #47 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Thu 3 Jan 19 10:43

    
Yes please, Jake.

Responding to Paula's <44>:

> that technology will not change human nature

Cranky perhaps, but we (obviously) need reminding. I think one reason
is the need to shift agency -- it's a mental optimization needed for
thought.  We need to think in terms of "What Technology Wants" because
we can't process the causal interrelationships fast enough.

One result is that we don't realize that autonomy is usually just a
form of delegation. (My self-driving car isn't really having the
vacation it wanted)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #48 of 231: Matthew Battles (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 10:48

    
Via email from Matthew Battles:

I'm curious to dig into the New Dark a bit more. I confess that I
haven't started James's book yet—I look forward to it—but I do note
a little gap, a swerve, between a formula like "The New Dark" and
"The New Dark *Age*. The latter evokes, for me, a Petrarchan
historicity we might well do away with, or anyway regard side-eyed;
the former seems more like a force stealing across the face of the
thing we used to call "the world." 

I read "New Dark" and I think of the teeming obscurities of objects
limned by the speculative materialists; I think of the faceless
demonology of Eugene Thacker; I think of Latour's recent typology of
worldlessness, with us never-have-been-moderns caught in transit
between a World we never truly held and a Planet that doesn't want
us any more. And of course, I think of Dark Mountain, whose
proponents as early as 2009 were rejecting the sparkle of
Bright-Green optimism for the teeth-gnashing joy of peri-apocalyptic
separatism. 

The Dark Mountain folks were buying used caravans and heading for
the downs long before the punctuated nomadism described here. What's
different in this New Dark? other than naming less a commitment than
a condition.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #49 of 231: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 12:03

    
Via email from our friend and colleague, Jamais Cascio:

Hey there, futuregang

I’ve been flirting around this collective of thinkers for awhile
now, like some Earth-grazing asteroid on an obscenely elliptical
orbit. Feels like I’ve been at the apogee of that orbit lately — I
can fully-sympathize with that writing block you described, <jonl>.
I know that some of it comes from spending too much time looking at
what’s happening in the present day to think about what could come
next. Gaze too long into the abyss, etc., except these days the
abyss gets your metadata, too.

I do most of my futures work with the Institute for the Future (much
of it with/for Jake), and over my decade+ there I’ve been cast as
the in-house Dark Futures specialist. The one they turn to for the
awful implications. The Eeyore that lets everyone else be someone on
the Tigger-Owl spectrum. It was fun, at first; now it’s just
exhausting. I spent much of this past Fall working on a deep,
detailed look at the future of the global environment for a big IFTF
client project, and by the end of it, I was ready to give up.

Some of it also comes from the realization that the social
(/political/technological/etc.) dynamics that the "clear-eyed
optimists" of the late 1990s/early-mid 2000s embraced as the
revolutions that will make the planet function properly — openness,
“bottom-up” collaborative movements, democracy, networks — have by
and large been captured by the people and ideologies that privilege
winning in the short-term over flourishing in the long-term.
Frankly, those people and ideologies seem to do a better job using
those tools than we ever did. It’s almost like that moment in a
movie when our hero does a heel-turn and we realize that they’ve
been working with the bad guys… except if we’d been paying
attention, we would have seen that all along.

But (barring an asteroid, an escaped Ebola-Smallpox cocktail, or
Great Dying-sized planetary methane burp) this isn’t a movie with a
distinct ending. We’re living in the perpetual stinger. So we must
persist. We have to muddle our way.

I know that my entry here is more of a mental purge than a
conversation point, so let me just ask a question. In the context of
muddling through, of just dealing with it, what are you four seeing
as positive harbingers? I gave a talk for the World Bank’s Global
Risks conference a couple of years ago, and I finished by saying
that the role of the futurist is often less Cassandra than Pandora.
We talk about the horrors and pains, but we still need to be able to
reveal hope at the bottom of the jar.

What’s at the bottom of your jars?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #50 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Thu 3 Jan 19 12:10

    
To speak to Matthew Battles' question (hi!), I have a bad tendency
to name things "new" and encapsulate them in aesthetics and ages...
I agree with you entirely about the necessity of escaping the grip
of successionism and suchlike. In fact, I'll just go ahead and quote
Karen Barad, from her totally excellent 'Troubling Time(s)': "Any
suggestion that the notion of the linearity of time is unsalvageable
and ought to be replaced with a new, arguably superior, notion of
time would be ironic, since it would be to fall into the logic of
progress and supersessionism." and I reference that because her
thoughts on what this New Dark looks and feels like come back to me
all the time: 

"... it is possible to do a diffraction experiment in both space and
time at once, whereupon a single particle will coexist in a
superposition of multiple places and times (Diffraction of Matter
Waves). In this case of spacetime diffraction, a diffraction pattern
can be accounted for by taking account of all possible histories
(configurings of spacetime), understanding that each such
possibility coexists with all others. In particular, then, in its
four-dimensional (relativistic spacetime) QFT elaboration, the
probability that a particle that starts here-now will wind up
there-then entails taking account of all possible histories, or
rather, spacetimemattering configurings. Crucially, these
‘possibilities’ are not to be thought of in the usual way: the
diffraction pattern is not a manifestation of an uncertainty in our
knowledge – it is not that each history is merely possible, until we
know more and then ultimately only one will be actualized – the
superposition marks ontology indeterminacy (not epistemological
uncertainty) and the diffraction pattern indicates that each history
coexists with the others."

ONTOLOGICAL INDETERMINACY NOT EPISTEMOLOGICAL UNCERTAINTY would have
been a better, but less catchy book title.

* Read the whole thing:
https://www.dropbox.com/s/oz8hjbj06y2nrxi/Barad_troubling_time%28s%29.pdf?dl=1


And bringing myself back to Barad makes me think differently and
possibly clearly about the question of aesthetics raised earlier...
I want to make another go of it... starting with Solarpunk and all
the beautiful stories and shapes its generating, particularly with
regard to myth-making and the possibilities of fantasy.

* This is a good intro to Solarpunk as well as the criticisms
attendant on it:
http://culturesofenergy.com/157-solarpunk-feat-rhys-williams/

(As the guest on the podcast points out, the IPCC reports are the
biggest pieces of solarpunk fantasy out there, given that we don't
currently actually have any of the technologies (such as large-scale
carbon capture) required to keep warming down to basically liveable
levels.)

Solarpunk is a good antithesis to Dark Mountain futures (as much as
I love them too), as it raises the possibility of a "good
anthropocene" - not morally good, but non-miserable. It's a start.
So yeah, how about https://goodanthropocenes.net/

I'd also like to state, from the discussion so far, that the
thinking, caring, doing, and organising of "what next" isn't likely
to and probably shouldn't come from anyone in this room. I've been
watching and am more than inspired by the presentations from the
recent Code Ecologies conference organised by the School for Poetic
Computation in New York. If you're jaded and appalled by tech, you
should watch this:

* http://sfpc.io/codeecologies/
* Full stream: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BsN_2oYnbLo

(And if anyone knows about or wants to build similar structures in
Southeast Europe, wave).
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #51 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (magdalen) Thu 3 Jan 19 13:25

    <scribbled by magdalen Thu 3 Jan 19 13:28>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #52 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 3 Jan 19 13:28

    


Bruce posits:

> an aesthetic is how you convince other people
> that the beauty has arrived. 

Cascio notes:

 > openness,
 > bottom-up collaborative movements, democracy, networks
> have by and large been captured by the people and ideologies 
> that privilege winning in the short-term over flourishing in 
> the long-term. Frankly, those people and ideologies seem to 
> do a better job using those tools than we ever did.

Nice to hear from you, Cascio. I think it's important to recognizing that
these 'people and ideologies', the Cambridge Analyticas and Trumps, may use
and abuse all technologies created by well-intentioned, long-term,
progressive thinkers. Whatever potentially lovely, collaborative thing we
come up with next - - whether that looks like an app or a social movement
or an alternative energy source - - can and likely will be co-opted by The
Bad Guys.

Paulina Borsook, author of 'Cyberselfish: A Critical Romp Through the
Terribly Libertarian Culture of High Tech' in 2000, posted about this with
appropriate crankiness above. Expecting technology to solve technology is
naive. Yet that's been our cultural and economic push for decades, hasn't
it? 

The culture that underlay the push can't be ignored. Culture speaks to
desire and aspiration. It catches us under the ribs with emotion,
tantalizes us with the potential of meaning (not to mention pretty, shiny
things and flashing lights). Many of us in this SOTW discussion have been
part of that culture, whether on the fringes like me or a well-known beacon
like Bruce. Together, we all co-created this culture. We fell for the
idealistic parts we wished would become true - - despite the dystopian
outcomes we loved in our literature, games, and films.

That culture gave many of us a dreamy, snappy vision: we were or ought to
become globe-traveling, everything-experiencing, mind-expanding explorers.
Digital technology and the Internet would unleash us from the earth, would
enable transcendence. Transcending the meat could be a big, semi-spiritual,
upload-yourself, Extropian event. Or it could be simple. The technology
would allow us to transcend our roots to the earth. We'd travel and move at
will, nomadic and brilliant.

In late 1994, I remember getting my first PowerBook (that's an old,
heavy-duty Mac laptop, in case any youngsters stumble across this
discussion). Ironically, I'd already been disabled by excessive computer
use, working on the Internet and The Well, with a virulent repetitive
stress injury. 

A friend gave me an external, 9600-baud modem the size of maybe three
iPhones stacked on top of each other. With this setup, I realized, I could
be free. Paying rent was stupid. (I had a giant space in an illegal
music-live-arts-party warehouse in Oakland, less than ten minutes' drive to
the Mission District in SFâ€¦ for $225 a month.)  

So I took my laptop, put my books in storage, and hit the road. I was poor
and half-disabled, sporting a ratty blue mohawk, mostly riding buses and
trains. I was no business-class jet setter and I felt too female to
hitchhike America as my Beat heroes had done. It still felt like I was
getting away with something splendid. 

Fast-forward seven or eight years. By then I'd done some actual business
class jet-setting and a whole lot of strategic and creative work on what we
still called "the Web." Now if I could travel *without* taking a laptop
with me? *That* felt like getting away with something splendid. *Then* I
felt free.

What technology allowed me to transcend were the piffling, trifling matters
one might associate with boring hausfraus: a consistent home, with the
commitments that implies. A real-life community I must interact with every
day, for socializing, political organizing, or even to get my basic needs
met. With technology, I could transcend my problematic, partially disabled
body. I could transcend nature. Family. Hearth. Kitchen. Home. 

It turned out I was actually transcending *life*. Life on this green,
imperfect planet. Life in all its messy, domestic, deep, emotional glory. 

Bruce proposes that we need a new aesthetic. I agree, ish. Aesthetics
emerge from and evolve together with cultures large and small. What we used
to consider The Future in all its cyberpunk glory had some freakin' fun and
fantastic aesthetics. No wonder we all signed up. Now that we're old and
cranky and scared, now that we see how this culture contributed to the
giant flaming hot mess that is society today. . .  this time, do we
recognize the potential repercussions of the aesthetics we create? Do we
curate and tread more carefully? Try to clue the Millennials in to what a
steaming pile of Big Data-driven shit we've handed them so they can improve
conditions for the next crew on deck?

Or are such concerns silly? Things evolve as they evolve. The street has
its own uses for things. The Bad Guys always find a way to appropriate the
new. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #53 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 3 Jan 19 13:52

    


me again, with some other voices to share:

When Jon asked me to join this discussion a few days back, I wanted to
bring more than my own voice. I asked a few friends: What issue, invention,
or node of general excitement do you see blossoming in the world right now?
Or destroying it? What matters, globally?

The top three answers were: dismantling oppression, creativity, and
cooperation. One friend in the UK, who's living and working closely with
artists who are women of color and/or immigrants, noted dismantling
oppression means abandoning our own need for perfection, together with our
urge to put a feather in our caps with every positive or charitable act we
make. Social media, it seems to me, makes that last bit kinda hard!

I also asked, "What is tugging most strongly at your own private *heart*
right now?" 

I heard isolation, despair, and disconnection. I heard spirit, hope,
action, and optimism. Susan Prince responded, "How can I put aside my
limited views, based upon 71 years of stories, and see beyond the immediate
'reality' of this life? How can I be available to function beneath/beyond
the artifice?" 

Josh Berger, creative director and co-founder of Plazm (and husband o' me),
began his answer with the word "light." That plays nicely with "puddle of
candlelight" and New Dark we're talking about here. He wrote:   "light. it
is darkest before the dawn. i feel optimistic in spite of the many dark
things happening, optimistic that we are at the beginning of a new era."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #54 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Thu 3 Jan 19 14:06

    

>48

Good call outs. There have been myriad precursors. It just depends
on which of Snow’s two cultures you’ve been hanging out in over the
decades. (Hanging out in both yields some interesting insights if
you can keep your head from exploding.)

To name just a few off the top:

Dark Mountain
Morris Berman (“The Twilight of American Culture”
Jane Jacobs (“Dark Age Ahead”)
Carolyn Baker (for the prepper set)
Daniel Pinchbeck (for the new age set)
Daniel Quinn
Postmodernists who could connect the dots
Joanna Macy (Buddhist and deep ecology focus)

However, somehow I don’t think Mr. Gates or his followers were
reading much of this material.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #55 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Thu 3 Jan 19 14:08

    

(Sorry, I know you already cited Dark Mountain)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #56 of 231: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 3 Jan 19 15:55

    
Discussions of the small school movement:

https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2010/02/17/22marshak.h29.html

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Small_schools_movement

https://www.latimes.com/opinion/editorials/la-ed-gates-education-20160601-snap
-story.html

I don't think it was a totally bad idea, it's just that in education
nothing is simple.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #57 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 3 Jan 19 17:02

    
my point goes further: it's not just that i dont feel you can use
technology to solve technology's problems: it's that i dont think
technology makes ppl better and kinder, solves the fundamental
tricky dual-nature of humanity (good? evil? discuss).

one thing i thot assange got right vs the original cyperpunks (RIP,
tim may) is he seemed initially to have gotten that transnational
capitalism is just as much a threat as Big Bdg dGovernment.

but whatever. i have never made a living talking about the future,
particularly one where we will all have our own private gyrocopters.


'technology as if people mattered?' nice idea in theory…
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #58 of 231: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 3 Jan 19 17:08

    
Our kids went to a small school inside Berkeley High.  They studied
media and social justice, taking on projects instead of AP classes. 
Rick Ayers and a few others put it together.  <busy>s son was also
in the school.  

Instead of an academic contest for a GPA and SAT score, they learned
together about the society they were coming of age in.  They met
people they’d never meet in a track system.

When our second oldest got to UC Santa Cruz, she met grammar school
classmates.  I asked if they hung around together.  She said no,
because after all those regimented years, they were ready to party
in college.  The kids from Berkeley had gotten that out of their
systems in high school, she said, so were more focused on their
studies.

It was not simple, but it was more engaging and relevant than the AP
classes that get that GPA up.  
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #59 of 231: Kevin Welch (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 19 21:46

    
Via email from Kevin Welch:

Greetings, SOTW participants. Kevin Welch here, lurker for several
years, first time posting. For those who don't know me, I'm a
lifelong Austin denizen and friend and collaborator with a number of
the participants in this discussion. In particular, I was turned on
to these conversations several years ago by jonl, and I consider it
a ritual I now start my year off with to read the musings posted in
these threads. I truly believe there is no more insightful place to
get a handle on the Nowpunk of our moment. My primary
non-pay-the-bills interests these days involve laboring in the salt
mines of digital civil liberties activism, a movement that
continually frustrates me in the net's ever-lurching insistence in
moving towards dystopia, and a movement that equally inspires me in
terms of the amazing people I meet who truly still believe that we
all can build a better world. Candles in the dark indeed.

I think it is no coincidence that myself and many of the
participants in this discussion have connections to Austin. Lifelong
Austinites like myself love to complain about the many changes that
neoliberal, depersonalized, venture-capital-fueled cosmopolitanism
have wrought on our town, but despite these global headwinds there
is a human energy to this place that is hard to stamp out, no matter
how many cookie-cutter condos the investor class manages to stamp
out. I sometimes joke that Austin must be sitting on leylines, there
is a continual excitation of the noosphere that seems to suck happy
mutants into a vortex centered on this former national capital,
still state capital of a city on a river in the forested hills.
Since the early days of the German revolutions of '48 refugees
settling here, Austin has continually embraced its status as a
candle burning bright amid the dark, endless prairies of Texas at
large.

I think this theme of the New Dark is really nailing our current
zeitgeist. Our technological chickens have come home to roost,
connecting the world connected the bad people as well as the good
people, our utopias couldn't survive outside laboratory conditions.
I think of Ursula K. Le Guin's quoting a mis-translation of Chuang
Tzu in The Lathe Of Heaven: "To let understanding stop at what
cannot be understood is a high attainment. Those who cannot do it
will be destroyed on the lathe of heaven." I feel that this book
(and the excellent 1980 PBS version of it) possibly capture this
feeling of New Dark better than any other. In that book is a world
ravaged by a climate out-of-whack, no nuclear wasteland but no
rapture of the nerds either. Every attempt to control the world, to
solve its problems, like some perverse genie granting ironic wishes,
only makes the situation worse. Every solution creates another
problem. Modernism has failed. The book's solution is positively
Discordian in its idea of embracing the chaos of the world, of a
human mind, of accepting the limits of understanding and control. A
Bodhisattva doesn't light a candle in the dark because they believe
that the light can destroy the dark, the dark has always existed and
always will exist. All the brilliant souls I am privileged to call
my friends in this life agree that the global state of things indeed
feels like a center that soon won't hold any longer, but I look at
their passion for their own small projects that they hope will make
their little corner of the world just a little brighter in the
gloom, and well, I can't help but find myself with nothing but hope
and optimism for the future. The Westphalian order may fall, but
millions of little candles all showing each other the way through
the New Old Dark, well, that might just be a future I would like to
live in.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #60 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Fri 4 Jan 19 01:06

    <scribbled by stml Fri 4 Jan 19 01:06>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #61 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Fri 4 Jan 19 01:14

    
I want to quote from my book, sorry, but since you're all
referencing the New Dark, I want to make this point clearly:

"We have been conditioned to think of the darkness as a place of
danger, even of death. But the darkness can also be a place of
freedom and possibility, a place of equality. For many, what is
discussed here will be obvious, because they have always lived in
this darkness that seems so threatening to the privileged. We have
much to learn about unknowing."

I'm going to keep insisting that this metaphor of bringing light is
not helpful, not least because it's been historically disastrous for
a huge section of the global population as well as the planet
itself, but also because it is fundamentally misconceived. It points
towards dominance and mastery as the only effective form of agency,
instead of engagement, cooperation, thoughtfulness, care, listening,
and attention.

If it's getting dark in here, it's because the whale oil lamp of
entrenched power structures is guttering, and the networks of
computational knowledge are browning out. The response should not be
to set everything that remains on fire, but to let ones' eyes adjust
- and listen to those who've been outside.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #62 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 19 02:01

    
Boy, we have got some mental firepower happening in the discussion
this year.   Wow! I’m tempted to knock it back for a few days to
just eat popcorn and take  notes.

Actually, I’m gonna try to grind up some kind of text on the need
for new aesthetics, and what they oughta look like, while I know
that James Bridle is watching.  It’ll take me a while.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #63 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 19 02:02

    
So yeah, I’ll just peaceably watch with folded hands here….  
However. 

I always knew, that when I got older, I’d see my contemporaries
whine about how great things were when they were young and had
libidos.  I’m kinda immunized to that, though, because this
attitude:  “Boy, things were so groovy back then, you wouldn’t
believe how they ruined everything” is a super Austin, Texas
attitude.  It isn’t even a Cosmic Cowboy baby-boomer thing —
Austinites have been full of annoying, nostalgic Weltschmerz since
at least the 1930s.   Maybe even the 1830s.  When it’s all around
every day, you get to understand how sickening it is.

So you know, I have to scold that.  Even when things truly *are*
objectively worse in many ways, it’s just so corny!   “We had it
great when I was young, but the Bad Guys took it and that’s why we
can’t have nice things” — when was that ever not so?  Has any
generation, ever, failed to blather that stale sentiment at people? 


You’re eliding your own participation in history!  “Only the young
die good!”  You’re not stuck in a bad traffic jam with your good
dune-buggy, your dune-buggy is always a part of the traffic!

It’s like watching Scarlett O’Hara say “fiddle-de-dee” while
Atlanta’s on fire.  
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #64 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 19 02:35

    
*Massive political leak/hack apparently transpiring in Germany at
the moment.

Julian Röpcke
&#8207;
Verified account
 
@JulianRoepcke


The leaked data, which was illegally collected until October 2018
and released December 2018, but just found now, is still publicly
available.

I searched through it 5 hours last night, read maybe 3%of it  and
already found cases of corruption and bad political scandals.
#BTleaks

The scale of the attack is unprecedented
Mobile phone numbers, addresses, private family conversations,
vacation pictures, bills, communications between politicians, work
emails etc. were leaked

In most cases, Outlook was hacked, in some cases also Facebook,
Twitter etc.
#BTleaks

#BREAKING
Germany faces the biggest hacker attack in its history.
Private data of almost 1000 German #Bundestag, #Regional Parliament
& #EU delegates was leaked.

I worked through the leaked data all night. It's shocking!
Not affected so far: #AfD.

https://www.bild.de/politik/inland/politik-inland/hacker-angriff-daten-von-pol
itikern-gestohlen-und-veroeffentlicht-59349480.bild.html …
#BTleaks


*Also includes some German artists, which is sort of amazing.

Also hacked were around 40 German public TV journalists and 10
artists, most of them known for their left-leaning political stance.
Also from the artists, comedians, moderators etc partially very
private data was leaked, in some cases nonetheless only mobile
number.
#BTleaks
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #65 of 231: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 4 Jan 19 04:10

    
I dunno, I kinda liked it better when you could drive 90 mph on the
L.A. freeways in what was then called "the fast lane."

I think there's a middle point between blind nostalgia and
recognizing that things can get objectively worse and thinking about
why, what that means, and what might be done about it.  I'm afraid
we'll have to wait for the coming human population crash to sort out
traffic in L.A.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #66 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Fri 4 Jan 19 06:05

    

Extraordinary post in 59. Thanks Kevin.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #67 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 19 06:47

    
Indeed. It's worth repeating Kevin's conclusion following James'
post ("the darkness can also be a place of freedom and possibility,
a place of equality"):

"A Bodhisattva doesn't light a candle in the dark because they
believe
that the light can destroy the dark, the dark has always existed and
always will exist. All the brilliant souls I am privileged to call
my friends in this life agree that the global state of things indeed
feels like a center that soon won't hold any longer, but I look at
their passion for their own small projects that they hope will make
their little corner of the world just a little brighter in the
gloom, and well, I can't help but find myself with nothing but hope
and optimism for the future. The Westphalian order may fall, but
millions of little candles all showing each other the way through
the New Old Dark, well, that might just be a future I would like to
live in."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #68 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 19 06:57

    
While it's tempting to assume the worst, I see plenty of reminders
that the (human) world is actually getting better by some measures,
e.g.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2018/apr/11/good-news-at-last-
the-world-isnt-as-horrific-as-you-think

"... while it is easy to be aware of all the bad things happening in
the world, it’s harder to know about the good things. The silent
miracle of human progress is too slow and too fragmented to ever
qualify as news. Over the past 20 years, the proportion of people
living in extreme poverty has almost halved. But in online polls, in
most countries, fewer than 10% of people knew this.... Our instinct
to notice the bad more than the good is related to three things: the
misremembering of the past; selective reporting by journalists and
activists; and the feeling that as long as things are bad, it’s
heartless to say they are getting better."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #69 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Fri 4 Jan 19 07:13

    

Great point Jon. There are a slew of positive developments taking
place globally in little pockets and corners that never see the
light of day in the mainstream media. Scotland's massive use of
windpower is just one example and Qatar's desalinization experiment.
You have to do some hunting and gathering so to speak. Steven
Pinker's latest book is a good source of specific data points along
these lines, however flawed the overly sanguine macro-level
perspective. It seems we can only chip away...developing any kind of
accurate perspective given the snowballing degree of change may not
even be possible.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #70 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 19 07:38

    
I've been involved in experimental and speculative projects,
sometimes cutting edge stuff, over the years, projects like
FringeWare, EFF-Austin, Plutopia, Worldchanging, SXSW - and the work
I did with Bruce on his Viridian Design project. I've done a lot of
writing and blogging about technology, culture, and media. I've
worked with the WELL here in various ways, including this annual
State of the World conversation. More recently I relaunched the
Plutopia News Network with the great producer (et al) Scoop Sweeney
and our highly creative colleague Maggie Duval.

Great projects, all, but aside from some of the writing I've done
professionally, they haven't paid a cent. Since the 1990s, I've put
whole-grain bread on table by working on various Internet projects,
including a large ongoing e-commerce attempt by Whole Foods Market
around the last turn of the century. That work with Whole Foods made
me a web developer as web development was just emerging as a
discipline, and that's how I've supported myself since then. 

I cofounded Polycot Consulting, where we used open source tools and
agile methodologies vs the bloated top-down approaches I had worked
with in the corporate world. My Polycot Consulting partners took a
different direction, so I continued working as a web developer,
renamed Polycot Associates, after a failed attempt to get into
consulting based on my work with social networks and what was
eventually called "social media."  It didn't make sense for me to
borrow a lot of money, get a building, and hire developers to work
with me. (I was a project manager, not a developer or a designer).

Instead I found projects, brought in contractors, and managed their
work. While we no longer had an office, others were doing similar
virtual work, and coworking was becoming a thing.  And there were
plenty of web contractors available - the Internet had "died" with
the dotcom bust of 2000, and was only slowly reviving. 

Getting to the point: I eventually had a group of developers I
wanted to work with persistently, and we were in conversation about
how to work together.  One of those, Benjamin Bradley, was not just
a brilliant developer but also forward-looking, focused on potential
new economies, and new ways to organize for work. Benjamin suggested
that we form a worker-owned cooperative vs. a typical company or
partnership. We caught fire with the idea, and hired a local
consultant who was working with the national Democracy at Work
Institute.  We found that our transition to co-operative
organization was happening in the context of a co-operative movement
forming.  We found that there were several other worker co-ops in
Austin, and we later learned about a new form called platform
co-operativism (which fed into another project we've been working
on, which I could discuss later).

As we got into co-operative thinking I had a thought: how can any
country hope to work as a democracy if its businesses are formed and
run as oligarchies? 

I had paid a lot of lip service to various ideas about changing the
world for the better, but in the co-operative movement I found a
practical way to do just that, in my day to day income-producing
work.  We've been very successful with our co-op so far - partly
owing to our skill and experience, but also owing to our deeply
collaborative spirit and our ability to find consensus in the
collaborative governance of our business.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #71 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Fri 4 Jan 19 07:47

    

Here's a little more on Pinker from an informative article in "The
Nation":

"Pinker devotes two-thirds of Enlightenment Now to surveying the
stupendous advancements that the human race has made in modern times
according to a dizzying range of metrics: life expectancy, hate
crimes, famine deaths, leisure time, nuclear proliferation,
pollution, democracy, human rights, “liberal values,” literacy,
levels of extreme poverty, “life satisfaction,” and much, much more.
He previewed some of this material in The Better Angels of Our
Nature (2011), in which he argued that the world has seen a decline
in violence and war, but now he’s attempting to generalize about
virtually all of modern existence, complete with more than six dozen
charts to visualize his flood of data. “The Enlightenment has
worked—perhaps the greatest story seldom told,” Pinker proclaims. We
still face many challenges, he continues, but if we trust scientific
experts, we can overcome them.

To be fair, Pinker is right that much good news today tends to be
underreported, even unreported. Most Americans probably don’t
realize that rates of extreme poverty worldwide have fallen over the
past few decades, along with the worldwide rates of battle deaths
and deaths from infectious disease. Pinker is also right that many
prominent observers in the past grossly underestimated the ability
of the human race to extract more resources from the environment and
grossly overestimated the odds of imminent apocalypse. He quotes, to
comic effect, a long string of mid-20th-century Cassandras who
confidently predicted that civilization would come to an end long
before now thanks to nuclear war, overpopulation, or environmental
catastrophe. (Of course, one could also point to a long string of
intellectuals, from the Enlightenment onward, who predicted the
imminent arrival of paradise upon earth—but no matter.) And he is
right that even if some of the predicted disasters do come to pass,
humanity will probably not be reduced to fighting for survival in a
Mad Max–style dystopia. “Even Hiroshima continues to exist,” he
points out, though the statement is not quite as comforting as he
seems to think.

If Pinker had simply made these points, Enlightenment Now would have
its uses. But he wraps his arguments up in such a thick layer of
exaggeration and misinterpretation that the book does more harm than
good. It makes use of selective data, dubious history, and, when all
else fails, a contempt for “intellectuals” straight out of
Breitbart. Pinker might not have intended the book to do so, but it
will bolster the claims of populist politicians against
intellectuals and movements for social justice while justifying
misguided, coldhearted policy choices in the name of supposedly
irrefutable scientific rationality.

Let’s start with the exaggerations. For all of Pinker’s apparently
exhaustive command of statistics, the situation of humanity is
hardly as rosy as he claims. The number of refugees worldwide, for
instance, has climbed vertiginously over the past few decades, and
is now approaching levels not seen since World War II. Pinker
dismisses concerns about rising economic inequality with the blithe
assertion that inequality matters less than actual levels of income
and comfort. He barely raises the question of what it might mean for
a society to have the lion’s share of its economic resources and
power concentrated in a tiny number of super-wealthy hands. He
acknowledges only in passing that real wages in the United States
and many other economically advanced countries have stagnated for
several decades, and he has even less to say about the increasing
precariousness of employment for millions of workers."

https://www.thenation.com/article/waiting-for-steven-pinkers-enlightenment/
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #72 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Fri 4 Jan 19 08:07

    
re: Austin/ Weltschmerz / Wyrdness

One of the 10,000 concepts I've internalized from Jim Dator (via
Gabriel Fackre in this case) is "aiglatson." Nostalgia spelled
backward, and signaling a yearning not for things lost, but for
things yet to come. Five years of living in Austin, and besides the
cedar fever, I'm still in the honeymoon phase of this relationship. 

One of the aiglatson-infused seeds I'm trying to plant here in
Austin is the idea that weirdness comes from wyrd--seeing signs and
portents of things to come. I started the by fabricating a 150 year
backstory for the Club of Wyrd/ Office of the Weird:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGEzmrYsJfg


If we are going to be true to our slogan and "keep Austin weird," we
have to keep our eye on the future(s). 

Keep your ears on for Club of Wyrd meetings in Austin, and
elsewhere. No Weltschmerz allowed. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #73 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Fri 4 Jan 19 08:10

    
"Things are getting better and better, and worse and worse, faster
and faster"--Tom Atlee
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #74 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 4 Jan 19 08:28

    
This is an exceptional SOTW conversation this year, thank you to
each contributing.

I particularly appreciate James's reminder of the indispensability
and importance of darkness. In traditional cultures and in our own,
the dark hours are when the stories of multiple meaning are told.
The stories that tell us who we are, who we can be, what it's useful
to be afraid of, what it's possible to hope for-- all the stuff of
the human psyche. Pinker's overly optimistic view is a story. The
futurists' most dire predictions are stories. We think, feel, and
make decisions on the basis of narratives as much as by logic and
that elusive and needed thing, reason. ("The heart has its reasons
of which the reason knows nothing" puts reason in its more true
perspective--what we think is reason shifts, to serve the more
hidden stories behind it, to give us what Robert Burton has
described as "the feeling of certainty.")

I don't mean the above in some postmodern dismantling way. Only to
say that the stories we tell ourselves about ourselves and others
are not fixed. And they matter, they are crucial, and they are told
in the dark hours when mysterious changes take root. I have found
among the most dismaying things of the shift in American discourse
that so many have taken up the stories of paranoia, of othering, of
fear. Such stories separate, build forts in the heart and weaponize
us against one another. They are not untrue--there is much worth
fearing afoot in the world, and I among those who have almost no
hope for our ability to leave our grandchildren a habitable ecos.
But how the story is framed at the largest level--who and what we
mean when we say "we"-- is not a passive observation. It is the
engine of culture.

The story of business as cooperative Jon tells. The stories on the
goodanthopocenes website James pointed to. They lighten, by some
number of perceptible molecules, my despair. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #75 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Fri 4 Jan 19 08:47

    
And your words lighten mine, thank you.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #76 of 231: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 19 11:57

    
Via email from Jamais Cascio:

> "i feel optimistic in spite of the many dark things happening,
optimistic that we are at the beginning of a new era.”

I’ve been asked, more often than I can count, whether I’m a
pessimist or an optimist. My normal answer is “Both. I’m a
short-term pessimist and a long-term optimist. We actually know what
we need to do to make the world better, but we’re having a hell of a
time getting to the point of being willing and able to do it.”

But Josh Berger’s comment, via <magdalen> (hi, T! Really glad you’re
a part of this), made me think of previous times in history where
we’ve found ourselves at the beginning of a new era. Were those
causes for optimism, pessimism, or something else? All of the above?
Because I absolutely agree that we are on the cusp of something new,
culturally and politically, driven by/mediated through/changing the
shape of our technologies. Paulina Borsook is absolutely spot-on
that technology doesn’t make people better and kinder, but our
technologies do allow us to express our kindness in new ways, to
different audiences and new families. 

Whatever this new era turns out to be, part of it will almost
certainly be entirely new pathways for expressing that kindness,
even if those pathways are also thoroughfares for malignancy. 

Or maybe I just need more coffee.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #77 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Fri 4 Jan 19 12:39

    
> what we think is reason shifts

So too, perhaps, 'what we think is technology shifts.'
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #78 of 231: Matthew Battles (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 19 13:11

    
Via email from Matthew Battles:

Thanks for your generous response to my questions, James—and to
everyone in this thread for the sharing of ideas, questions, and
hopes. 

"[T]o let ones' eyes adjust--and listen to those who've been
outside"... this does seem the right way to meet the new darkness.
It feels like it's been a bit of a breakthrough year for
minoritarian futures, for indigenous perspectives on futurity in
particular. Are there NDN fictions, first-nations speculations,
afro- and other-futurisms that folks are following? 

It's notable that amid so much sublunary confusion, it's also been a
year of looking to the heavens. Over against roadsters in space, I'm
inclined to privilege the visit of 'Oumuamua, the first interstellar
object to be detected and identified as such. Beyond the wonders of
Ultima Thule, Mars, and the gravity-echoes of colliding black holes,
however, the hygiene with which we approach stargazing also seems in
need of a healthy readjustment. The urge to speculative fabulation
in our astronomical imaginary needs to be nourished not only by new
phenomena & discoveries, but new/old perspectives. What do you all
see when you look to the stars? Whose constellations ring true for
you now; whose celestial navigation do you trust?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #79 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 4 Jan 19 17:39

    
a friend just appointed me codirector of her hindsight institute

(https://www.prabapilar.com/hindsightinstitute/ — and yes it's
mostly a joke.


so in that spirit, of everything old is new again, was reminded of
george stewart's 'earth abides' — where a passing observation by the
protag-survivor was that he now avoided dogs: they had gone feral
and grown sleek feasting on the remains in hospitals in urban
centers.

this came to mind in fall  2018i i saw a documentary about dogs gone
feral in tierra del fuego. argentine program of moving ppl from
urban centers to tierra del fuego to work in electronics (yes,
right) meant folks arrived there with little infrastructure nor
knowledge of rural life. so they let their dogs run free or
abandoned them — and how quickly these dogs became feral, destroying
the traditional sheepherding, and messing with the ecosystem
overall.

fireland dogs

https://www.brownpapertickets.com/event/3609429

evidently this is a global problem, feral dogs in the urban/wildland
interface.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #80 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sat 5 Jan 19 10:06

    
Hey everyone, first post, though I've been reading along all week,
as I also do every year.

The first thing I thought of when I saw we'd have multiple featured
guests this year was how for the first time this year the Kennedy
Center Honors honored a *team* instead of just the usual
individuals.  That was the four co-creators of Hamilton - watch the
documentary about the creation, ("Hamilton's America" PBS), to see
why it's well deserved.

I am really enjoying each of your contributions, as well as how it
seems to change the dynamic of the topic from being a firehose of
early-warning observations and reports from the field to more of a
conversation.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #81 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Sat 5 Jan 19 11:24

    

thanks, keta. hope it's fun to read.

so, you guys, how 'bout that Singularity? that's the moment when
artificial/machine intelligence outstrips that of humanity, and/or when
machine-based superintelligence gets so, like, *super*, that it wreaks
massive changes on human civilization. 

Bruce says it's dead. various smart scientist people have proclaimed that
it isn't possible, because, ya know, humans are soooooo special and
ultrasmart, nothing can outpace us. 

one of my friends in the AI field claims we've already reached singularity.
old news, he says, adding that the USA and silicon valley are pretty
inconsequential compared to Asia and the Middle East in terms of technology
and culture.

<tvacorn> above says: 

>  if the
>  singularity was really dead then I doubt people like Gates would be
>  pushing this macabre vision in which we literally outsource the
>  essence of our humanity ? our emotional life along with compassion
>  and empathy  ? to highly sophisticated machines

which Sherry Turkle at MIT has been warning us about for years.

maybe the issue is how to define or frame the singularity. have we created
outboard wetware that precisely mimics the human brain? nope. have we
created a giant machine 'intelligence'-of-sorts that we now serve, rather
than the other way 'round? i'd say we have. and perhaps that's what the
singularity really is: the moment we start serving the robots.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #82 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 19 11:58

    
"have we created a giant machine 'intelligence'-of-sorts that we now
serve, rather than the other way 'round? i'd say we have. and
perhaps that's what the singularity really is: the moment we start
serving the robots."

How exactly do you see humans serving machines? I'm missing it.

The technological singularity assumes that an artificial
intelligence would become a learning system that would run through
cycles of improvement sufficient to make it a superintelligence that
would surpass all human intelligence. 

The difficulty I have with this speculative concept is that nobody's
provided a definition of "intelligence" - in fact it's defined many
ways for many contexts. And, if only for that reason, there's no
clear way to compare machine intelligence to human intelligence.
While machines do simulate human intelligence, it's questionable
whether a machine thinks like a human thinks. I don't think anyone
quite knows how the latter works anyway. 

I'm not afraid that Colossus is going to take all power, that humans
will be subservient to computers.

My concern would be that we delegate responsibilities to computers
that they ultimately don't handle well.  Jake had a speculative
design concept that involved a future where AIs had replaced mayors
in various cities, with results to disastrous that the practice was
abandoned - I think  outlawed - though AIs could still serve as
consultants. Maybe he'll have more to say... 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #83 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 19 12:56

    
To have a Singularity, you're supposed to have searingly fast
advances in processing power, memory and bandwidth that go on
indefinitely.  It's not going to happen.

On the plus side, I was watching AlphaZero play chess an entire year
ago during the previous State of the World. Now I'm still doing
that, there's better analysis of what the thing is up to, I'm
enjoying it more than I did and I'm even starting to appreciate its
beauty.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #84 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Sat 5 Jan 19 13:46

    

Thanks for revisiting this topic <magdalen>. Lest anyone think that
the Singularity and transhumanist "dream" is passe, a quick read of
a November article in the "New Yorker" indicates otherwise. The
article talks about DARPA's ongoing attempts at brain/machine
interfacing via experimentation on human subjects. It describes how
a paraplegic woman who was the subject of one such "successful"
experiment eventually ended up supporting R&D efforts to develop
thought-controlled military aircraft. 

The article – a bit of a puff piece -- did remarkably little to
question the ethics or wisdom of such experiments but did go on to
briefly describe earlier research in using embedded brain tech to
control human emotions and social behavior: "After the race riots of
the late nineteen-sixties, two Harvard neurosurgeons proposed that
neural electrodes could be used to quell social violence. In 1972, a
Tulane psychiatrist used them to try to create “heterosexual
arousal” in a gay man." 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #85 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 5 Jan 19 14:22

    
Good piece to bring up-- but I read it as sounding a VERY clear
warning about the militarization of the research. Presented as
augmenting the capacities of the injured, the article stressed
rather strongly that it could by the way be used to augment the
capacities of battlefield robots and/or soldiers. That it was a kind
of conceptual bait and switch that allowed the ethics to go
unquestioned, I took that as no small part of the point. 

But the piece wasn't particularly about letting the machines make
the decisions, and then the decisions about the decisions.

 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #86 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sat 5 Jan 19 21:54

    
>My concern would be that we delegate responsibilities to computers
that they ultimately don't handle well. 

Which gets us right back to Facebook and social media algorithms...

Another example would be electronic trading bringing down global
financial markets.


I think your whole post <82> is fascinating Jon, because as you
query the idea of a technological singularity, what comes up for me
is how you also touch on the really interesting parts of the Gaia
hypothesis.

>The technological singularity assumes that an artificial
intelligence would become a learning system that would run through
cycles of improvement sufficient to make it a superintelligence that
would surpass all human intelligence. 

If you just replace the word "technological" with "biological" and
the word "artificial" with "distributed" you get a sentence that
could be Lovelock.  Yes, the entire living system became
superintelligent and self-regulating, surpassing humans long ago.

And as far as nobody providing a definition of intelligence, what
has been fascinating me this year has been places where intelligence
has been pointed out to me that I had completely missed precisely
because I had too rigid a definition of intelligence.  Trees think. 
Forests think.  Slime mold thinks (and can design the Tokyo subway
system given a map of the city).  Perhaps places think.  Very likely
it all thinks.

It's very true that nobody knows how a machine thinks, (and thus we
can't be sure the simulation is the reality), but I'm starting to
wonder if the intellectually faulty (or at least treacherous)
problem of defining intelligence "many ways for many contexts" is
also somehow  a key to something important and not always just a
fixable kind of sloppiness.

Someone asked above "What keeps you up at night?"  Well, one thing
for me is playing out the implications of the Gaia hypothesis - or
more warmly stated, the reality of "Mother Nature".  Because when
you're talking about machines and singularity, certainly the thing
to fear is becoming subservient to them.  But in the case of
perceiving other kinds of intelligence, receptivity is of primary
importance, and in the case of Mother Nature, service is exactly
what you want, and the whole game is releasing blocks to being of
service, in service, all that.  

This brings me to what Matthew Battles commented in <78>, that:

>It feels like it's been a bit of a breakthrough year for
minoritarian futures, for indigenous perspectives on futurity in
particular. Are there NDN fictions, first-nations speculations,
afro- and other-futurisms that folks are following? 

And I would say, yes, that is exactly where my interest has been
drawn this year.  Ilarion Merculieff of the Global Center for
Indigenous Leadership is particularly articulate.  The fascinating
way that Standing Rock transformed the language of protest - we are
not "protesters" we are "protectors".  More on all that in later
posts.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #87 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:18

    

I watched rather a lot of chess videos last year, and not because I
like chess.  I watch the games because I’m seeking out aesthetic
principles for generative art systems.

People sometimes call chess “The Drosophila of Artificial
Intelligence.” However, it’s not the long computer-science history
of AI and chess that interests me.  I don’t play chess, and I’ll
never be good at it.   Mostly, I want to understand why AlphaZero,
the neural-net super-chess player — currently undefeated by any
person or any engine — plays in such a pretty way.

To start, I have to make an aesthetic argument that AlphaZero indeed
plays “beautifully.”  I don’t want to just declare that, de gustibus
non disputandum — I’ll try to shore that up with some evidence.   

So, well, at least the thing’s famous: it’s a hit.  AlphaZero is
genuinely popular among chess fans.  The more conventional chess AIs
—  the “engines,”  in fan-speak— can certainly kick the ass of any
human player.  However, human chess fans never clamor to see their
games.  The engines bore people; their games lack grace.  

AlphaZero, though, has some major admirers.   Chess masters even
like it.  They praise its play in public.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #88 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:19

    

Also, you might try comparing AlphaZero’s games to the recent human
world chess championship between Magnus Carlsen and Fabiano Caruana.


These two guys, Carlsen and Caruana, are excellent modern chess
players and very erudite professionals, but they play more like
conventional chess engines than AlphaZero does.  In their recent
head-to-head match, Carlsen and Caruana ground it out in endless
draws.  They never blundered: they were inhumanly consistent.

So, they had to decide their world championship in sudden-death
matches, where there’s very little time to devote any human
intelligence to the state of the board.  Then Carlsen then won
promptly because he’s got a well-known knack for playing rapidly.

None of those Carlsen-Caruana games are beautiful “immortal” games.
Those game are world-class, but they won’t be fondly remembered
decades from now.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #89 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:22

    

I’m no chess pro, so a lot of the stamp-collector subtleties are
bound to pass me by.   However, I can tell if the events on the
board would make a live audience gasp and applaud.  Chess does have
an aesthetics; people get a frisson from it; they’re thrilled, even.


Chess has been pretty for a long time.  I’d even argue that there
are  aesthetically “prettier” games that date from the old-fashioned
1800s, at least in the kinetic-art sense of the way that pieces
elegantly swoop and move around.   

Years ago, chess people had very little theory. There weren’t a lot
of book openings or book endings to memorize, so grandmasters were
bashing it out like sword-fighters.   So in these much older,
historic  games there’s lots of crowd-pleasers, the too-bold
strikes, the head-exploding unnecessary complications, deliberate
tricks, traps, cunning swindles — psychological operations even,
where one grandmaster knows he’s got the other on the ropes, so he
moves in for the kill with dazzling stunt moves that he knows will
upset the opponent.

AlphaZero doesn’t do any of that.  It doesn’t even do what its
best-known public opponent, the engine “Stockfish,” does.   It never
plays like a human, but also,  it doesn’t play like  any standard
computer code “engine”  with its motor-like sets of specialized
component subroutines, and its value-weighting system.

It’s hard to describe what it does, in the arcane computer-science
realities of neural-net back-propagation, but, well, it’s still just
software, all right.  AlphaZero is the winningest chess engine ever,
but it’s not an AI god, it's not getting insanely better.  It’s not
an amazing, mystic Singularity that is accelerating off the charts;
its game-skill seems to be leveling off.  

Also, AlphaZero’s play, once you get used to watching it, is a bit
same-y.  AlphaZero wins all the time, but it is not brilliantly
inventive.  It doesn’t toss off an endless bravura series of
super-complicated, brain-scrambling gambits.  It’s just dazzlingly
unorthodox by the previous standards of humans or non-neural AI
engines.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #90 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:23

    

Some people say that AlphaZero's play is “beautiful” in a
mathematical way, in the way that math is “beautiful” when it’s
simple and true.   But I doubt that AlphaZero has actually “solved”
chess, in the sense that its neural net method of play is the one
“true” method, and the only method that henceforth will ever win an
AI chess game.

I believe that, oddly, because I’ve got more faith in AI than that. 
I’m a big AI skeptic, but the defeated Stockfish has got heaps more
AI in it than AlphaZero does.   “AI” has not conquered chess,
because AlphaZero is just a modestly-sized neural net.  As an
“engine,” AlphaZero’s not all that big, not powerful in processors,
not ultra-fast  in code execution and it doesn’t have heaps of Big
Data about chess-game databases.   

I’m inclined to surmise that gangs of very specialized AIs with
databases of all of AlphaZero’s games would be able to gang up on it
and defeat it.  Also, new neural-net architectures are waiting.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #91 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:24

    

I may be wrong about that last part; maybe the phase-space of chess
has been exhausted by AlphaZero, and it’ll always be the greatest at
chess, forever.  But would it be the greatest at some variant that
wasn’t chess, a super-complex game that was a million squares
across, instead of eight?  Probably not.  That means that we can put
aside a hushed, amazed respect for AlphaZero.  It’s okay to pick at
it critically.  Like you might analyze other beautiful, nonhuman
phenomena. 

    Snowflakes, maybe.  Human artists can’t draw a billion beautiful
snowflakes in ten minutes, but it’s pretty common to have them fall
out of the sky.  Sometimes a snowfall is very pretty, even
enchanted-looking, other times snow is damp, gloomy, ugly and
oppressive, and it’s all right of us to look out the window and
assess that — “pretty snow.”  That’s not presumptuous of us, it’s
more like a pleasant statement of our willingness to live in the
world we're in.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #92 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:25

    


    AlphaZero is not an intelligent human, though it would do well
at a chess Turing test.   Chess masters usually know when they’re
blind-matched against engines.  AlphaZero, though, plays with such
dazzling efficiency that it would probably be world-famous if nobody
knew what it was.  It would slaughter all other human players with
its naive brilliance, but it might be taken for a child-prodigy.

     I appreciate the public commentary that chess analysts offer
about AlphaZero, but they always attribute intentionality to it,
which I dislike.  “AlphaZero wants to do this, it plans to do that,
it wants to avoid doing this…”. 

      That certainly happens in human chess, and even engine chess
has some kind of value-driven routine where it’s “trying” to
“achieve” some state of the board, in some sense of “trying.” 
Watching AlphaZero play is more like watching frost forming on the
the window.  “The frost has plenty of moisture over here but it
‘wants’ to invade the part of the window over here where it’s not as
damp,” that remark seems illegitimate to me.  It gets in the way of
properly appreciating the beauty of what’s going on.  It’s a
tooth-fairy explanation.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #93 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:27

    


     I do have some ideas about why AlphaZero’s play looks so
pretty.  If it was an artist asking me for advice as a critic, this
is the helpful feedback I would offer to young Alpha.  “You’ve
clearly got a gift for that part — you should do more of that!”

1.  Since AlphaZero taught itself to play, its play is free of the
human installed base, so it’s liberated to do things that surprise
humans.  It has a kind of charming wunderkind naivety.  That element
of surprise is beautiful — it has a gosh-wow factor — but I don’t
think it’ll last.  Ten years from now, people will be talking quite
knowingly about neural-net play.  The sense of wonder has a short
shelf life.

2.  It doesn’t value the pieces.  It’s not emotionally or
algorithmically attached to them; to “throw away” a valuable rook
for a cheap knight is no problem.  This looks very daring and even
ethereal by human standards.  Even engines won’t do that because
they tend to hoard everything, rather like Apple mopping up profits.

3.  AlphaZero always plays the whole board — it never gets tangled
up in the hot corner where all the action seems to be.   So it’s
continually “retreating” to distant areas of the board where the
bishops, rooks and queen are just as powerful, but it’s hard for a
human eye and brain to stay focussed.  

     After you see AlphaZero do this twenty or thirty times, though,
you’re like: “Huh.  It’s doing that bishop-way-over-yonder thing
again.”  I think this is the new aspect of AlphaZero’s native play
that human masters will pick up pretty quickly.

4.  It’s very tidy.  It makes small, rather feline movements to
adjust its positional structure, rather than bulldozing in to crush
all resistance.  It commonly does these little grace-notes at the
exact time that a human player would be getting really excited and
bashing-in for the kill.  There’s something really pretty about
these small, neat moves — they’re like blue-notes in jazz.  Or,
rather, it’s just got its own swinging tempo; jazz defeating
chamber-music.

There’s something oddly gracious and feminine about this machine’s
apparent attention-to-detail.  These apparently small and irrelevant
housekeeping moves often turn out to be keys to victory.  So you
can’t dismiss that as “tidiness” - it’s like complaining that your
neat-freak Mom does the laundry too often, while next door they’re
all dying of typhus.

 AlphaZero’s refined, delicate chess play feels like an advance in
civilization, rather than just an advance in the game.  It’s like
it’s figured out table manners and washing your hands — it makes the
previous era of chess look like feudal life in a barracks.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #94 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 19 04:29

    


So, well, I enjoyed that.  An engrossing game, chess.  Been around
quite a while, and in 2019, particularly interesting.  

 However — what does chess imply for the aesthetics of other,
seemingly very different forms of algorithmic expression?  Is there
some kind of Artificial Artistic Intelligence lurking here, which
might have broader applications for other things that get diligently
wound-up and seem to run on their own, such as code art, motion
graphics, device art, installations, techno music?

I’m still working on that issue, in a Drosophila lab-style, but I do
think about it differently than I did just a year ago.   And when
this year 2019 is over, well, maybe I’ll get somewhere.  We have to
hope, even if AlphaZero can’t and doesn’t.

As special brain-candy for hardcore chess fans, here’s Napoleon
Bonaparte getting his ass kicked by the “Mechanical Turk.”
Allegedly, anyway.  I admit it: I wasn’t there.

http://www.chessgames.com/perl/chessgame?gid=1250610
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #95 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sun 6 Jan 19 06:36

    
Fascinating.  I brought up Ilarion Merculieff, the Aleut elder
earlier.

He describes himself as being of the last generation that had a
traditional education, and says that it primarily consisted of
watching and wondering.  When he was five or six he says he
remembers watching a cliff full of seabirds for days and weeks and
months on end, watching the birds do things like fly up in a flock
and then wheel and dip and turn as one, wondering, "How do they do
that?"  

He says the traditional way of education was simply to support the
naive child in its curiosity.  His grandfather was the one primarily
in charge of his education, and when the young Ilarion would ask a
question, instead of answering, his grandfather would just point him
back to observing - the answer was there, in the preserved and
developing naivete.  We think of traditional knowledge as being
handed down, but maybe it is protecting the great plastic capacity,
keeping alive the possibility of seeing with new eyes that is the
secret. "Aiglatson," as it were.

Now I'm interested in AlphaZero too...
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #96 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Sun 6 Jan 19 08:41

    
Bruce I’d be very interested in any thoughts you might have about
posts 84 and 85. 

My take on the transhumanist agenda is that it’s about perfecting
and enhancing human capability. There are plenty of pop culture
examples around to illustrate how deeply this meme is embedded in
our cultural mapping. Transformers, the Terminator movie, the
Nietzschean notion of “Übermensch”, often roughly translated as
“Superman.” So it seems fair to ask if the AI/ BMI quest driving to
the singularity (I see them as existentially equivalent) connects at
some level with these value-laden memes and the overall but likely
misguided notion of human perfectibility.

>86 and earlier
My concern would be that we delegate responsibilities to computers
that they ultimately don't handle well.

Yes of course and this brings up the issue of ethical and even
spiritual considerations. Designers and programmers will likely
never be able to create a true ethical sensibility and the more
spiritual aspects of human experience in AI and no degree of
developed intelligence can be considered worthy without this
checkpoint. 

The logical conclusion is that such creations will be ontologically
flawed from day one, even as they may make important contributions
to various other human pursuits and endeavors. Some will argue that
ethical “capability” can be encapsulated in an algorithm, despite
the fact that ethics debates have raged for centuries. Implicit is
the notion that programmers themselves will act as the final
arbiters of whatever ethical profiles are developed. But here’s the
Catch 22: the programmer can only create something that already
exists within the programmer’s mind.

>86 again. The Gaia hypothesis stipulated a “living” system not just
a complex adaptive system in my understanding
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #97 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Sun 6 Jan 19 09:56

    
I haven't watched as many Chess games as Bruce has, but I've been
reading a lot of conversation around AlphaZero and AlphaGo/Master
etc... it was fascinating and disconcerting to watch this "alien
intelligence" (a Go master's word) land in a world of human
players... 

The part I keep returning to is the Advanced Chess model, which I
trot out a lot because I think it has a very strong and interesting
message. When Kasparov was defeated by Deep Blue, he was very very
pissed off, but he came back the next year with Advanced Chess (aka
Centaur Chess) which was the same game played by human/computer
teams (as opposed to human vs computer). And this immediately became
wildly interesting, with wholly new approaches to play being
generated very quickly.

One of the most startling findings of Advanced Chess is that while
even a modest chess computer can now thrash any human player, a
human and a modest computer working together can beat a much more
powerful computer playing alone. There's a transformative
combinatorial effect at work that magnifies the strengths of both
ways of thinking (and, to my mind, emphasises their differences in
interesting ways).

Google has talked a bit about what it calls the Optometrist
Algorithm, which it developed with Tri Alpha Energy, a fusion
startup. This is essentially Advanced Chess applied to scientific
experiment: runs of TA's experimental fusion reactor are assessed by
a human and a machine learning algo, with the algo presenting a
human overseer with a selection of possible tweaks to the
parameters, and the human choosing which set to follow. One result
is one that Bruce notes in the chess play: the whole board gets
played. Humans have a natural tendency to ignore the edges and
concentrate on a few variables (e.g. piece value in chess). The algo
doesn't do this, so everything is in play, but the human plays
hunches too.

Centaur approaches (which Matt Jones, now design director at Google
AI, has been talking about for some time) are a lot more hopeful
than singularity fears - hoping, of course, that we get to be the
front end of the horse.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #98 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 6 Jan 19 11:44

    
I found keta's post (#86) quite fascinating--in its entirely, but
especially in raising the comparison of the Singularity to the Gaia
Hypothesis, and our differing emotional responses to them. But of
course Gaia isn't something new, potentially transcending our human
capacities, Gaia produced them. Our cultural distrust of 'the
machines' taking over is rooted perhaps in a right humility, the
sense that anything we created, even if it then begins to enact its
own evolution-equivalent, cannot be as wise as the sum of the
unfathomably numerous experiments run by the biosphere through time.


But then if we include what we have made as part of Gaia's
making--what then? Might I/we have a different, warmer, emotional
response? The way that one of my geneticist friends (unlike most of
my geneticist friends) is wildly enthusiastic about human beings
taking control of our own future evolution, full steam ahead? (Don't
worry, friend is now retired, and was studying what is, not creating
what is not yet.)

Not being a chess player, I cannot appreciate AlphaZero's beauty
except by the picture Bruce draws of its novel ways of playing. To
do the effective thing in ways not previously known is surely one of
our human definitions of beauty. This perhaps makes it qualitatively
different from other forms of computer-generated "art." Chess is a
game with a goal, knowable, recognizable; one party or the other
wins. Art, in the more classical sense of that word, leads toward
some not-before-seen destination, which nonetheless leaves the
viewer/reader with a feeling that something has been effected. 

In my own field--words--computer-generated works are thus far rather
dispiriting to engage with. There may be passing beauties, but you
could arrive at the same kind of inventions by any randomizing
process. The works as a whole, though, feel vapid.  

James brings in another view yet with the Centaur model. Expansion.
A useful and lovely metaphor--though I wonder, is it the Singularity
when the classical Greek Centaur image trades its halves? When the
humans become the embodying hooves and the AI the head? 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #99 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 6 Jan 19 11:51

    
(slippage)

> There's a transformative combinatorial effect...

This reminds me of the scenario offered by William Calvin in his book,
"THE THROWING MADONNA: FROM NERVOUS CELLS TO HOMINID BRAIN" 

> Calvin, a distinguished Univ. of Washington neurophysicist, starts 
> off this collection of essays with a wild surmise. We are right-handed
> (most of us) because women discovered early on that babies calm down 
> when pressed where they can hear the heartbeat; that means cradling 
> the baby with your left hand. Some wise lady tool-users also 
> discovered that they could hold a child and lob a rock at a passing 
> rabbit, thereby increasing the larder at little energy expenditure. 
> Since one side of the brain is usually better at programming rapid 
> sequencing (like throwing a ball), mothers with left-brain sequencers 
> might then be more successful at hunting--and mothering--and thus 
> increase their genes in the pool. Hence, the Throwing Madonna. Though 
> Calvin milks this theme in the first few essays (in terms of bigger 
> brains, handwriting, etc.), he admits it's conjectural, and then 
> moves on. 

taken from:
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/william-h-calvin-2/the-throwing-mad
onna-from-nervous-cells-to-homi/>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #100 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 6 Jan 19 12:25

    
> wildly enthusiastic about human beings taking control of our own
> future evolution

I've been nursing the notion that, as generations have passed, we have
drifted away from the original understanding of 'Cybernetics' as
the science of "control and communication in the animal and machine."

James Lovelock initially defined Gaia as:

  "a complex entity involving the Earth's biosphere, atmosphere, oceans,
   and soil; the totality constituting a feedback or cybernetic system
   which seeks an optimal physical and chemical environment for life on
   this planet."

Perhaps because the 'natural' and 'constructed' worlds came to be seen
as opposites, it tends to be difficult to keep the ideas of 'animal' and
'machine' in mind long enough to discern the true cybernetic aspects
of each.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #101 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 6 Jan 19 12:57

    
Keeping the notions of animal and machine largely separate has been
a highly successful strategy for thousands of years. So perhaps it's
not surprising that we struggle to see any aspects of sameness between
then.

But gradual advances in machine learning (which is rooted in our early
understandings of animal neurodynamics) tend to force us to confront
the hard distinctions we have historically made between animal and
machine.

The image of Bruce studying AlphaZero's game play in search of aesthetic
principles brings to mind Ramachandran and the notion of Neuroesthetics:

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neuroesthetics>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #102 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Sun 6 Jan 19 13:52

    
It seems particularly striking that just at the moment we're
creating "real" artificial intelligences (however narrow the
definition of intelligence they assert), and in particular as these
forms of AI reveal themselves to be essentially unknowable to us
(the inscrutability of deep learning) - it's just at this moment
that science and society seems to be tentatively considering
acknowledging the real intelligence of other life. 

The last few years have seen legal personhood granted to apes and
proposed for elephants - based not on inherent rights or dignity but
on 'cognitive complexity' - bestsellers on cephalopod intelligence,
and an increased awareness of the "secret lives" of trees, gut
flora, and so on.

We spent a good chunk of the 20th century reconfiguring our
understanding of ourselves and the natural world in terms of
cybernetic information processing systems: suddenly the brain was a
computer and everything was feedback loops and complex networks. It
must be expected that a true reckoning with the nature of
intelligence - once we've got it working in our little toys - will
lead to a similar reassessment of the world around us - this time
not as systems we can master, but as quasi-alien forces we must live
among and in dialogue, conflict, companionship and cooperation with.

That or the looming Copernican trauma of being knocked off the top
of the intelligence tree will force us to acknowledge that we never
had a monopoly on intelligence all along.

A pity then that the forms of AI currently under development will
turn out to be the exclusive properties of surveillance capitalists
or the Chinese state, which sure aren't planning on being the back
end of any Centaurs.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #103 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sun 6 Jan 19 15:05

    
Here's a link to a transcript of a TED talk by Svante Pääbo titled
"DNA clues to our inner neanderthal" in which he concludes:

> So to sum up, what have we learned from studying genomes of present 
> day humans and extinct humans? We learn perhaps many things, but one
> thing that I find sort of important to mention is that I think the
> lesson is that we have always mixed. We mixed with these earlier 
> forms of humans, wherever we met them, and we mixed with each other 
> ever since.

<https://www.ted.com/talks/svante_paeaebo_dna_clues_to_our_inner_neanderthal/tr
anscript?language=en>

Surely when 'modern' humans emerged from Africa and encountered both
Neanderthals and Denisovans they were experienced as quasi-alien beings.
Living in dialogue, conflict, companionship and cooperation may be our
key human skill.

> A pity then that the forms of AI currently under development will
> turn out to be the exclusive properties of surveillance capitalists...

I trust that will only be a transition phase.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #104 of 231: Matthew Battles (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 19 21:31

    
Via email from Matthew Battles:

I'm enjoying thinking through Bruce's evocative breakdown of the
aesthetics of Alphazero--this windowpane-sized irruption of the
technological sublime. (It calls to mind Stanislaw Lem's idea of
"bitic literature": artistic works undertaken by complex, networked
AI systems for *their own* pleasure; human scholars of such works,
in Lem's speculative vision, would spend much of their time striving
to discern whether aesthetic activity was taking place, identifying
its edges, in logs and outputs.) And I wonder: how does this
aesthetics scale? What does this beauty look like on the scale of
urban policy, public health, or any other more ramified realms in
which we're asking algorithms to tidy up the board? How do we begin
to talk about it? Where do these aesthetics begin to touch on
questions of ethics, of action?

I invoke the sublime because, in its Kantian genealogy, it's
licensed a certain powerlessness (or abdication of responsibility,
anyway): the sublime is specifically that upon which humans are
powerless to act. But sublimity isn't the only approach to snow and
storm, to waterfalls and mountains. At the risk of massive
reductiveness, I want to imagine that one future aesthetic/ethical
strand might be inspired by certain strands of indigeneity... the
anthropologist Eduardo Vivieros de Castro has elaborated the concept
of "multinaturism" from Amerindian cosmology: the notion that myriad
forms and phenomena (game animals, crops, mountains and rivers, even
the weather) are understood to have their own natures, within which
they develop as communities, as societies—and the social obligations
that emerge in those natures web out to touch on other natures,
including the human. We humans seek to propitiate, to gift, to
placate, communities of these other natures; we reach out to
interact with them through dream and vision. This multinatural
cosmology *works* to the extent it helps people think relations of
obligation and interdependence among species and forces and things.
It requires acknowledging that such entities have stakes in the
cosmological game. 

Many have written about connections between the "cannibal
metaphysics" of Vivieros de Castro and a Gaian Anthropocene. We're a
long way from elaborating such a metaphysics at scale (though the
Water Protectors provide one example of a starting point). Is it
crazy of me to wonder if we begin at some point to exercise cultic
relations with algorithms—to entreat them through visions; to offer
them votives? Maybe we're already engaged in such cult activities,
and we don't recognize them as such?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #105 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 19 00:41

    

As a creative class, American authors are rapidly going broke.

https://www.authorsguild.org/industry-advocacy/authors-guild-survey-shows-dras
tic-42-percent-decline-in-authors-earnings-in-last-decade/

That’s great news from a New Dark perspective, though.  It means
we’re on a much more level playing field with writers who don’t
publish in English — since we’re all in the dark, and nobody’s got a
megaphone.  So if you’re looking for arcane, resolutely
noncommercial literary fiction, how about some Finns or Latvians? 
Or you might try the Bangalore Literary Festival, where they all
read English, yet they long to write and be heard in their 22
official Indian regional languages.

The imminent downfall of the Great American Novel might even raise
hopes for  creative expression from whales, gorillas, elephants and
chess-playing neural nets, who have been all cruelly sidelined in
the sweepstakes for the Pulitzer.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #106 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 19 01:33

    
The Centaur chess thing is indeed interesting (and even has some
roots in a science fiction novel). 

 I also think that Centaur Chess illustrates the  big problem that
any “new aesthetic” for algorithmic or device art tends to founder
in a bad metaphysics.  Especially, the bad metaphysics of AI, which
has been a tarpit for decades.

Centaur Chess has the Walter Benjamin “aura” problem of “who” gets
the credit credit for the game.  If the artist is a mythological
beast (and basically a figure of speech), rather than some
metaphysically identifiable entity, that’s gonna be major problem. 
You can see from the Wikipedia entry here that the problem of
distributing credit is all over the map.  The debating parties have
no basic concurrence on what they’re talking about.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Chess

Garry Kasparov is gonna stay Garry Kasparov, even if he drops chess
and goes into politics, while “Stockfish” is a radically unstable
entity.  It’s been Stockfish 1,2, 3, 4, currently 10…. “Leela,”
which is the open-source sister of AlphaZero, is crowdsourced and on
GitHub.  

So instead of being a mythic guy crossed with a horse, a modern
“centaur” is gonna be more like a guy — or even a large group of
programmers — crossed with a moving cloud of bees.

http://lczero.org

These metaphysical problems have real-world consequences, because if
you don’t know “who” is doing art, you don’t know who to encourage. 
And it’s unrealistic to think that an artist, even a “centaur” one,
will reach a creative peak without years of focussed effort, a
community of practice, and a sustaining audience.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #107 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 19 01:34

    

I wonder what would happen if somebody programmed a system to play
the “prettiest possible chess,” without necessarily winning a
victory — a king-free fairy-chess variant, played for sheer glorious
wow-factor.  Is that even possible?  Would anybody watch that?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #108 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 19 02:10

    
*Noah Raford on line one.  Google and Amazon may be exterminating
American literature, but the WELL's got the talent in 2019, folks.

From: Noah Raford

Hey guys,

Loving the SOTW this year on my last days of holiday in France
before heading back to the desert tomo. 

Just wanted to add one thing via email since I’m not a WELL member.
I don’t have Jon’s email, so you guys will have to suffer my musings
(thank you). 

While I am deeply sympathetic to the whole “things are breaking and
getting dark” theme of the moment, I do want to throw in one bit of
counter perspective.

Bruce kicked it off this year (as he does so well) with a brief log
of his travels. A lot (but not all of it) was in Europe and North
America. One of his two bright spots was in India, however. 

This year took me to China several times, Taiwan, Korea, India,
Thailand, Singapore, and of course Dubai (where I live) and its
surrounding neighbors.  The one thing I have to say is that the vibe
is quite different than that reflected in the convo so far in some
of these places. 

I mean China just landed a space ship on the moon for God’s sake!
Yes, things are getting weird, but for those outside the walls of
Europe and North America, they’ve been weird for decades. 85% of the
world lives outside Europe and North America. 

It’s hard to understand what life is like in double digit growth
terms, but most of these places have been going full blast into the
unknown for years, often with barely more than a pair of headlights,
a cigarette, and a strong cup of coffee as their guide. 

Everything is challenged all the time around here. Breakneck swerves
to avoid certain death are common and exhilarating leaps into the
void is an everyday experience. So is struggling with less than you
need against unknown forces out of your control, suffering defeat
frequently, but producing miracles often. 

From this angle, none of this feeling of “uh oh wtf?” should be
surprising. It’s what most people feel most of the time in most of
the rest of the world. 

Yeah the future is unclear (“dark”, in James’ lovely words), but
hasn't it always been? Maybe we’re just starting to wake up to what
most of the rest of the world has been dining on for decades. You
don’t lay in bed in these places worrying about the world not making
sense. You get up in the morning, throw yourself into the fray,
fight like hell, do your best, and pray you make a little progress
at the end of the day towards improvement in your circumstances,
whatever those may be. And that’s ok. That’s just life in an
uncertain world. 

Also, history. This holiday I read several books about the Ismaili
Assassins, the Crusades, the Malmuks, Stalin’s gulags, Ghengis Khan
and the Mongol Wars in China. You think things are weird now? Try
living back then! Empires were literally springing up and crashing
down around you. Dozens of people were asserting conflicting claims
of being God’s messenger (the Mahdi; the rightful guided one); at
the same time and often in the same city. If that wasn’t bad enough,
an unstoppable horde of literal barbarians was coming your way and
if you didn’t submit to them, they would destroy your entire city,
enslave your wives, kill your sons, burn your buildings, and leave a
pile of bones 50 feet high to send a message to your neighbors. 

I mean, you think we’ve got it tough? Girl, life is a dream compared
to that. How about we all just enjoy the fact that most of us don’t
have to worry about psychedelic religious chameleons living in our
apartment building, poised to murder us with a poisonous golden
dagger to claim their place in heaven. Or fighting Cossacks every
night to avoid working the worst shifts in an open pit gold mine at
minus 50 degrees Celsius in a Kolyma prison camp. 

I know this might sound dismissive of the suffering many of us feel
as we struggle to get to terms with how our lives are changing. It
isn’t meant to be. Stalin was right when he said “the death of one
is a tragedy but the death of a million is a statistic.” 

I guess all I’m trying to say is that there is already an ocean of
candles out there in the dark, with billions of people around them
who are vastly more experienced at dealing with weird, traumatic
things than we are. And that is reassuring, to me at least. 

An example; I had Christmas dinner this year with a guy who walked
from Eritrea to Libya after the government burned his village,
crossed to Italy in a wobbly boat captained by pirates, skipped
trains and boats to get to Norway, got kicked out, and is now a
pastry chef at the local boulangerie in my mother in law’s village
in France. The dude showed up to dinner on an electric bike, was
happy as a clam, and couldn’t stop laughing about the Gilets Jaunes.
“Those guys have no idea how good they’ve got it. It’s hilarious!” 

Again, I find this attitude deeply reassuring. Things really aren’t
that bad, they could be a lot worse, and they are generally getting
better. Yes, there will be train wrecks, genocides, and injustice.
The climate is falling apart and many of us could become homeless or
jobless or worse. But compared to dealing with messianic crypto
zealots trying to slit your throat or crossing the Sahara by foot,
I’ll take first world anxieties any day. 

All best and keep it up!

Noah 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #109 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 19 02:57

    
*There’s a neural-net deep-learner teaching itself to use a
cockroach-like robot crawler to “walk.”  You can see how this ties
my interest in AlphaZero to my interest in kinetic art.

https://venturebeat.com/2018/12/31/this-ai-teaches-robots-how-to-walk/

*It’s kind of endearing how “badly” the thing walks at first.  After
it starts waling more “efficiently,” it’s movements are rather less
interesting.

*Now imagine a deep-learner robot that can beat a cockroach at
walking.  Just, you know, outdo an insect in some unpredictable,
previously undiscovered way, much like AlphaZero baffles human
players.  Not monster AI, not a Singularity, just, like, a walker.

What kind of world is that?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #110 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Mon 7 Jan 19 04:39

    
Huge sympathy and gratitude for Noah's points (#108). Thanks Noah.

I'm very much of the view that there's more going on elsewhere than
most of North America / Northern Europe notices, and indeed at
breakneck speed.

One thing I've been thinking about a lot - and this is connected to
my earlier musings on Ghosh, the Great Derangement, and the
future-at-the-periphery - is the forking timeline. 20-30 years ago,
Japan was the future. The sheen, the computing, the teeming life,
the fashion, the noise, the lot. That's where we'd all be living in
our future cyberpunk something-topia. And then the slump happened,
and the future went somewhere else. If you go to Japan now, it's
still a future, but a sort of weird 80s future, a stub future,
recognisable but not the one that most of us ended up inhabiting.

The Silicon Valley / North America / Northern Europe future - which
is not cyberpunk, what's the word for that Bruce? - which half the
world is currently chasing feels an awful lot like it will be
another stub. It's so obviously pleased with itself and complacent
and totally unsustainable for the other 85% of the planet,
environmentally, financially, and socially, that there's going to be
a break, and the mainstream future will branch off in another
direction. SV/NA/NE will continue to exist, might even continue its
radical acceleration, but other things will happen elsewhere, and
they will be the dominant mode.

Dubai, where I had the good fortune to visit Noah this year, is one
possible future fork. It's looked down on so much as this
glitzy-trashy-yet-oppressive seastead by SV/NA/NE, but it's the
bright shining future for most of the world which can't get an EU/US
visa, and far *less* oppressive and brimming with opportunity than
most other places they can get to. (Citizenship is the battlefield
of the 20th C).

So whether EU/US builds walls or just declines, the future will be
defined by which parts of its hegemony India, China and Maybe, Just
Maybe the Mediterranean/Middle East choose to run with, and which
bits they rewire and reinvent. And hopefully the answer will be more
interesting than moon landings, social credit, hologram politicians,
hyper-development and surveillance capitalism. 

(The most interesting place politically on the planet right now is,
for example, the Democratic Federation of Northern Syria, an
autonomous but highly contested and widely assailed polyethnic,
libertarian socialist polity focussed on decentralization, gender
equality, and environmental sustainability. Defend Afrin!)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #111 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Mon 7 Jan 19 04:45

    
(*** Citizenship is the battlefield
of the *21st* C obvs)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #112 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 19 07:56

    
Doug Rushkoff's upcoming book, "Team Human," "argues that we are
essentially social creatures, and that we achieve our greatest
aspirations when we work together&#8213;not as individuals. Yet
today society is threatened by a vast antihuman infrastructure that
undermines our ability to connect. Money, once a means of exchange,
is now a means of exploitation; education, conceived as way to
elevate the working class, has become another assembly line; and the
internet has only further divided us into increasingly atomized and
radicalized groups." (That snip is from the Amazon blurb at
https://smile.amazon.com/gp/product/ref=pe_2418930_385745700_pe_r1_b4/?ASIN=03
9365169X, in case you want to read more.)

Doug is an advocate for the kind of worker-owned co-operative
business that I've been part of for the last few years. We're a very
small company - I had been thinking that we should grow, not just to
increase revenues but to work through the challenges of co-operative
endeavor.  It's one thing for a half dozen people to work from
consensus, much more "interesting" when you have hundreds or
thousands of members. There are few examples like Mondragon
Corporation, a federation of co-ops employing around 75K people,
based in Spain. When we worked with co-op consultants, Mondragon was
offered as an example of what's possible.

We haven't grown our web-development co-operative by that much -
rather, several of us have been involved in building a platform
co-operative (defined by Wikipedia at
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Platform_cooperative).  This new co-op
would have multiple classes of stakeholders, and working out the
structure for profit sharing and governance has taken months, given
the complexity of the model. We've just recently completed that part
of the planning phase, and we're focusing more on steps to get to
initial launch of the platform.

I no longer think much in the abstract about "saving the world." I'm
doing something real that could make things better, at the same time
putting bread on the table. 

My co-op does some of our web development work for large, global
corporations, and I often wonder what it would take to convert those
organizations to a more co-operative endeavor.  I've never been
close to a large corporation that wasn't operated as a federation of
collaborative teams and divisions, so I tend to think they're really
not far off from what we're doing, though the general structure is
more of an oligarchy.

I should add that I tend to be skeptical about "democracy" as we
usually think of it, but my skepticism is sort of like Winston
Churchill's - democracy is hard, it's messy, it has all sorts of
issues - but it's still the best and fairest way to organize. And
this takes me back to Team Human: "being human is a team sport." We
have to organize socially, and organize as networks, resisting the
will "to other" and to exploit. Leadership can be organic and
transferrable. 

We don't have to follow the familiar model if it doesn't support
empathy & humanity. We don't always have to compete; co-operation is
often a better alternative.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #113 of 231: Administrivia (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 19 10:35

    
This was posted earlier, but worth repeating:

Short URL for the world-readable version of this discussion:
http://bit.ly/stateoftheworld2019

Email address for anyone not a member of the WELL to send a comment
or question:
inkwell at well.com
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #114 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Mon 7 Jan 19 11:11

    
Quite a few provocative and interesting and broadening posts in this
last round, thank you each.

Especially to Noah, for picking up the early thread and reminding of
the non U.S.-centered world this world actually is and always has
been. I will though take issue one aspect of that post-- to include
'climate change' as one among other equally named concerns seems an
error to me, from where I post (on the near-fringe of two years
running of "worst fires ever seen" here in paradisiacal California,
and many years of "largest fires ever" leading up to this). Without
a viable planet, even the earlier calamities named in that post will
seem minor, local events. Food security for a global population
still expanding precipitously is only one aspect. I don't need to
name the all-too-familiar others. 

Team Human needs to develop some sense of solidarity soon if we are
to address this most over-riding issue.

I also want to say how much I appreciate the thought about our
coming to understand the world's many forms of intelligence as
intelligence. I've been having that conversation with some of my
scientist friends for fifteen years. The speculation that thinking
about AI is causing us to think about other forms of intelligence
more broadly is really interesting.

As an aside, Bruce, I have trouble imagining how a person would
experience the "wow" moves of your proposed no-goal chess game. What
conveys the 'wow,' if there is no arc of direction-intention to the
moving? Never seen before? In dance choreography, novelty of
movement brings pleasure, sure, but not least because the limitation
of the human body is being challenged, and also because the history
of dance sits behind our acts of witness. In the case of a computer
playing a board game, wouldn't it all become entirely arbitrary and
meaningless? Constraint's breaking is a kind of pleasure--but only
if the constraint's presence is felt. The serotonin dopamine
explosion of aesthetic pleasure is dependent on there being *some*
context of customary expectation's transcending.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #115 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Mon 7 Jan 19 11:41

    
>100 Perhaps because the 'natural' and 'constructed' worlds came to
be seen as opposites, it tends to be difficult to keep the ideas of
'animal' and 'machine' in mind long enough to discern the true
cybernetic aspects of each.

I'm concerned about framing the Gaia Hypothesis or the workings of
biological organisms as simply complex adaptive systems whose code
can eventually be hacked and cracked. Presumably we’ve moved well
beyond the long discredited Cartesian notion that animals are simply
machines although Bruce raises a good point that the technology can
be used to connect with and better understand other life forms. In
the meantime, CRISPR is already being widely abused but at least the
Chinese scientist making designer babies is now presumably under
detention. In the meantime, professional ethicists keep making the
usual tepid warnings which get filed under “for future
consideration”. And so it goes.

>That or the looming Copernican trauma of being knocked off the top
of the intelligence tree will force us to acknowledge that we never
had a monopoly on intelligence all along.

>A pity then that the forms of AI currently under development will
turn out to be the exclusive properties of surveillance capitalists
or the Chinese state, which sure aren't planning on being the back
end of any Centaurs.

Excellent points. The means of production and social control and
repression, a growth industry. If there are scenarios by which this
seemingly ineluctable trend can be undone or otherwise thwarted, I
would love to see them. But hard to imagine this happening in the
current generation.

>114 Without a viable planet, even the earlier calamities named in
that post will seem minor, local events. Food security for a global
population still expanding precipitously is only one aspect. I don't
need to name the all-too-familiar others.

Great point Jane. We have to move beyond the “things are ok until
they’re not” mindset. One challenge is how to shift to “seven
generations ahead” thinking when we can’t easily project future
trends in the next 10 or 20 years. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #116 of 231: Craig Maudlin (clm) Mon 7 Jan 19 15:46

    
I think part of the challenge is to resist the urge to seek quick
answers.

A dawning realization that things long held to be opposite may have
aspects in common, should not trigger a tumble to the other extreme --
that they must now be the same.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #117 of 231: Max Anton Brewer (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 19 15:54

    
Max Anton Brewer sent us the January 7 edition of his weekly
newsletter, which he says was inspired by the conversation here:

SCIOPS 03.01: Keanu Face
by Max Anton Brewer

On New Year's Eve, I walked miles home into a brutal snowstorm. Snow
doesn't come often to Albuquerque, and when it does the whole town
shuts down. Besides, the Oober drivers here are as drunk as everyone
else.

So I walked headlong into an obsidian wind. The front of the storm
curled down the mountains like a skinning knife. Particles of light
hurtled past the edges of my eyes, but the force of the gale was too
strong for me to gaze ahead. I focused instead on my boots, one in
front of the other and the other in front again.

When I dared to glance up, I could make out, through the dizzying
traces of snow, just the edges of buildings, obfuscated by darkness
and weather and frozen tears. My hometown, made alien by the coming
storm.

Twenty-nineteen, everybody!

It does feel dark. Even in this sun-bleached town, the mood is
cloudy. Everyone's wearing mirrorshades and making Keanu face. The
21st century finally reached Middle America.

All we can see from here are the shadowy outlines of the forces that
will define my generation. But that's more than we had last year.
The carapace of the culture war tears wider, to reveal the coming
crises.

I see two catastrophes that will converge upon us in the 2020s and
define the battle lines of this century – “catastrophe” here in the
topological sense, as a cliff, or a canyon.

One is a tradition-vs-novelty generation divide.

We think of this as normal, but for thousands of years most people
lived just as their parents did. The idea of Progress is relatively
new, and based at first on the exploited energy of slaves and then
on the externalized costs of fossil fuels. Only for a few hundred
years have these great changes happened at the speed of generations.

In the last fifty years, Moore's law accelerated that progress to
unimagined levels. This generational divide is a gaping chasm. The
president of the America place is 72 years old. He grew up in a
world of cars and cassette tapes and unprotected sex and
well-protected sexism. A world where the social order had been
decided, and people called things like Donald were in charge and no
one else.

That world is gone, defied by that veil of ignorance that is the
internet.

I grew up knowing a person first by their thoughts, their words,
their art, their vision. Class and skin tone didn't enter into it.
This is an unprecedented cultural shift to do in a half century.
It's not necessarily about how old you are, though there appears to
be a solid clumping pattern. (In America, the culture war that
culminated with President Cool Black Friend marrying all the gay
people is also a key signifier.)

Patriarchy, racism and class privilege are all on the chopping
block, but they are by no means dead. The culture war is not over.
Those who were promised privilege rage against the evening of the
odds.
The other catastrophe is the climate bottleneck. 

In nature – and we are always in nature – the discovery of a large
store of energy will cause a species' population to spike. Like
yeast in a vat of sugary mash, we humans gobbled up all the oil and
coal and methane and we made more humans.
More humans meant more hives, more engines to power our human hives,
more farms to grow the meats to feed our human heads. Our engines
and more hives ate so much of the world, in fact, that we began to
choke on our own exhaust. We poisoned our environment with our own
waste products, as indeed do yeast. The alcohol we seek is their
excrement. When it's strong enough to kill the yeast, that's when
it's good to drink.

So we have reached the peak of our expansion, at least from fossil
fuels. The climate is destabilized forever – we can now only
navigate our descent. And the oil is running out, the return on
energy invested is declining, the resources for building the
renewable energies are scarce, the water is drying up. The storms
are coming – snow, fire, landslide, hurricane, tidal wave.

Where you find yourself in the climate apocalypse largely depends on
how many resources you have right now. That doesn't mean money or
land, necessarily. It could mean social connections or agricultural
skills or deep wisdom. But the sloshing-about of refugees will not
cease, and the storms will get worse, and the infrastructure is
crumbling. When the food doesn't show up on the shelves, the people
are going to start asking where all the money went.

The money went to people, people!

A few people, with names and highly punchable-looking faces. (That's
an opinion, by the way, not a fact. I said punchable-looking, they
look punchable. To me. As a non-expert, I don't have any medical
advice about which faces are more suited for impacting with your
fist implement.)

Some people got all the money, and they know it. They're sitting
tight, hoping no one comes to ask. They're planning their escapes,
to New Zealand, to Mars, for when the plebes come a-pitchforkin'.

The people who have all the money want economies to grow. This is
because for them, The Economy is equivalent to their bank account.
On the other side of the tracks, the Economy is an omnipresent
monster constantly gnawing at the edges of your sanity. There,
“growth” means the growth of the landfill, the chemical plant, the
refinery – and the weird growths on their lymph nodes.

Simple test: do you have all the money? Do you feel like you got
away with something, through your own skills or luck or (most
likely) nepotism, and now you have the money?

If you do, take a look outside your window and see if anyone's
marching down your street with an actual guillotine this week.

If you don't have all the money, well, you might want to search
“cancer self-check” and start feeling around.

So, two battle lines drawn. If you're the type of person who likes a
nice little 2x2 grid with the axes labeled and the various factions
pinned on, well, go make one, because you're the sort of person who
would like to. Send it to me. You show me yours, I'll show you mine.

For now, to be kind to your attention, I'll just sketch the four
forces I see emerging from the fog:

NEW MONEY: Techno-vampire solutionists intent on becoming immortal
robot wizards whether or not it kills every other form of life in
the known universe. This does have a certain nifty charm, but they
got all the money and I didn't, so I'm sharpening my stakes.

OLD MONEY: Petro death cultists who respond mostly to the eldritch
demon of syphilis whispering in their brainmeats.  The rich of the
20th century, the original 1 percenters, the psychopathic necktie
sharks of the Cold War grown old, bloated, demented. Adventurism and
extraction and opium given way to petulant nuclear arms-boasting.
Their avarice is surpassed only by their lack of concern for the
future.

OLD OLD MONEY: The reactionary movements currently driving a wedge
through electoral democracies worldwide are not a surprising turn of
events, as the pundits and comedians would have it. Nor are they
laughable. They're an insurrectionary form of feudalist bigotry.

They're the old slavery-and-kings crowd, former champion, back for
another taste!

It's the oldest value system still in the ring, and yet “traditional
values” (like killing the unbeliever, and treating people as
property) are making a comeback. Whiteboy jihad.

Because the OLD MONEYs largely agree with these pointy-headed
values, the nationalists have been funded pretty well – so far. The
further they move to the right, the more likely that the
center-right will abandon them and join the centrist liberals in a
MAKE OLD MONEY OLD AGAIN campaign. Plus the antifa supersoldiers are
around every corner…

NO MONEY: Me. Probably you. Most of the world. Trying to get by
day-to-day without losing our minds or hearts or keys or children.
Do I have any children? I don't see any. That's probably good, all
things considered.

NO MONEYs aren't trying to grow our bank accounts, design artificial
minds, or reinstate feudal hierarchies. We're trying to stay alive
in a world that no longer makes sense.

That's the most realistic attitude to take, in the short term. But
in the long term we're going to need myths, visions, a story to tell
us who we are and where world we live. The indigenous futurists, the
tactical artists, the solarpunk utopians point the way.

We have to make a stand for harmony, for Balance, in the face of
ever-burning Growth. And at the same time we have to fight a rear
guard against the reactionaries, who would have Balance in the form
of a return to the Dark Ages.

The Green New Deal is the tip of something emerging from the gloom,
but it has to be a trojan horse for a fully egalitarian, ecological
future. We need to capture the imagination of the world, change
completely the way we relate to our planet.

How do we do that?

Stay tuned for volume 3 of SCIOPS, coming to your inbox every Monday
this year barring acts of Gods or hangovers! Now with more salt and
hand-tossed shade! Share with your friends! Attach to your permanent
record!
If you made it this far, thanks for reading. I love doing this, and
you're who I do this for. Way to go.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #118 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Mon 7 Jan 19 19:44

    

great stuff there!

and great stuff from everyone posting here. i take Sundays off digital
media, and logged back in tonight to marvel at the many interesting words
of jane, jonl, tvacorn, bruces, keta, james bridle, and those who emailed
in. 

fabulous.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #119 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 19 01:03

    
*I like it when a pundit predicts a bunch of stuff, and then looks
back later and gleefully praises himself for his own acumen and
accuracy.  There's something touching about it.  It's like a guy
tying trout flies and then he brags that he caught some actual fish,
somewhere, sort of.

https://battellemedia.com/archives/2018/12/predictions-2018-how-i-did-pretty-d
amn-well-turns-out
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #120 of 231: Cory Doctorow (doctorow) Tue 8 Jan 19 05:56

    
@bruces/105: "As a creative class, American authors are rapidly
going broke."

I think that you're giving a pretty limited survey (and patchy
analysis) more credit than it deserves. Here's what I wrote on BB:
https://boingboing.net/2019/01/07/nonrepresentative-surveys.html

"Blame authors' fortunes on monopolism, not university professors,
booksellers and librarians"

 The New York Times weighs in on an Authors Guild survey that shows
a "drastic 42% decline in authors' earnings over the past decade.
John Scalzi offers some important perspective.

Here's the summary:

* Authors Guild: authors' incomes are way down, thanks to Amazon's
monopolism, which is crushing indies and traditionally published
authors alike; universities are relying on fair use and Google Books
for coursepacks, and big tech overall is "devalu[ing] what we
produce to lower their costs for content distribution."

* New York Times: yeah, it's mostly Amazon.

* Scalzi: This isn't a very good study. They surveyed 5,000-ish,
self-selected authors (and the Science Fiction Writers of America
didn't participate). Comparing the fortunes of authors today to
Hemingway may not be very representative -- think instead of writers
like John Brunner, who lived a writerly life that's pretty
recognizable to writers today. Was there really ever a guilded age
of writerly incomes, or just a bunch of survivor bias?

My take: Amazon and the other monopolists are a huge problem. But
big tech isn't uniformly culpable. Facebook and Twitter are
certainly big social problems, but, they're not hurting authors. The
idea of "devaluing what we produce" by letting people talk to each
other for free is incoherent, intellectually bankrupt nonsense,
ripped from the pages of "Home taping is killing music" and "Home
cooking is killing restaurants."

Also a problem: consolidation in publishing (we're down to five big
publishers, and rumor has it that Simon and Shuster will be a
subsidiary of Harper Collins within a year). Consolidation in
bookselling (letting the chains merge until only B&N existed was
great for looter hedge-fund sociopaths, not so much for
bookselling).

The Authors Guild recommendations are a mixed bag. Letting authors
unionize and negotiate for good rates with Amazon is a great idea.

Establishing a lending right that charges libraries for the right to
lend books is a terrible idea. If we're going to fund authorship
through state grants (which I totally, absolutely support), let's
break up digital (and publishing!) monopolists, make them pay their
fair share of taxes, and fund the NEA and other institutions. But
attacking libraries' funding in the midst of the human race's
neoliberal extermination crisis is an attack on literally the only
institution left in the country where you are welcome even if you're
not spending money or praying.

It's not just libraries that the AG is taking aim at, it's also
booksellers. The AG is worried about returned books entering the
stream of new book sales. This is, as far as I can tell, not a
problem. Making life harder for indie bookstores will not win the AG
any friends. Librarians and indie booksellers are authors' class
allies, as are university professors. Our adversaries should be the
tax-dodging, Fortune 100 Big Tech/Big Content vampire squids with
their blood-funnels jammed down our collective throats.

This is a category error that is often made by copyright maximalists
when they argue over "piracy" and tech: they locate the problem with
readers, technology, public lending, etc -- not with monopoly
capitalism that reduces the competition for our works and starves
the public coffers of the social safety net that has made a career
in the arts survivable in years gone by. The problem with Big Tech
is "big," not "tech." 

==

References:
https://whatever.scalzi.com/2019/01/07/author-incomes-not-great-now-or-then/

https://www.authorsguild.org/industry-advocacy/authors-guild-survey-shows-dras
tic-42-percent-decline-in-authors-earnings-in-last-decade/

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/01/05/books/authors-pay-writer.html
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #121 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 19 06:42

    
I think we accept uncritically the argument that Amazon is
"monopolist," as though it was producing and delivering all the
goods it sells. However Amazon specializes in fulfillment, not
production. It's allowed small companies, authors, and artists to
bring to market items that otherwise would never have been sold.

Amazon is actually the realization of the vision we had with
FringeWare back in 1990 or so. Some remember FringeWare as a
synthesizer of virtual cultures, a community of smart geeks sharing
within an emerging digital culture, or publisher of a cool 'zine
that had affinities with Mondo 2000, bOING bOING, and CoEvolution
Quarterly (an important influence for us and many others).  However
our original idea was to create an online market so that creatives
and techs who couldn't get their products to market otherwise
because of the benchmark cost of getting into stores could sell
online with minimal overhead. If we had been successful at this, we
might have been similar to Amazon.

I don't see in Amazon a platform that is killing small business. I
see it as a facilitator of many small, medium, and large businesses,
extending their sales, not destroying them.

I'm not saying there are no issues with Amazon. In fact, I think
someone should challenge them with a platform co-op with similar
capabilities, though that could be tough: Amazon has spent its many
years as a company refining fulfillment processes and leveraging its
power to make deals that facilitated cost-effective last mile
delivery of products.  That was a bugaboo of e-commerce.  When I was
involved in a relatively large e-commerce operation, we could only
be cost-competitive by offering free shipping, which cut into our
profits quite a bit - especially with heavier products that were
costly to ship. Since shipping and fulfillment is a big part of its
offering, Amazon focused all these years on tackling that problem. 

So Amazon could stand some competition, and it could treat its
employees better. But I don't buy the argument that it's killing
small business, or that it's a detriment to authors. In publishing
specifically, Amazon and on-demand presses like Lulu have removed
barriers to entry and given authors a cost-effective way to
self-publish and find an audience. They don't have the marketing
power of big publishers, but at least some authors have found ways
to market their works online with various degrees of success.

I can't see how "Amazon's monopolism ... is crushing indies and
traditionally published authors alike," except perhaps by
facilitating more competition from authors that don't follow the
"traditional" path? What are the characteristics of membership of
the Author's Guild, that it would have an issue with a platform that
is stimulating sales and distribution of books? I understand where
small, independent book stores might have issues (though I see that
some of those appear to be thriving, apparently by diversifying
offerings and creating a compelling store experience). But I'm not
clear why authors would have a beef with Amazon.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #122 of 231: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:03

    
I think you're right on the money here, Cory. 

One way monopolism shows up is in the terror the companies inflict
on their editors, which gets passed along to writers in a couple of
ways. First, most obviously, in the stingy advances on offer. It
used to be that no one really expected every book to earn out; the
idea was that the few books that did, and bigly, would support the
ones that didn't, so that every writer who wasn't Stephen King could
make a living. That's still sort of the case, but editors, at least
the ones I know, feel pressured to make every book a "winner." One
editor I know well left the business because, as she put it, "If I
had to produce one more P&L instead of editing a book, I thought I'd
go nuts."

A more insidious effect is that editors seem more likely to kill
books. Maybe it's just a coincidence, but in the last couple of
years I've heard a similar story from three good, established
writers. They got a decent advance (in the $200K neighborhood), but
then found themselves pressured to show their early work to the
editors, who gave detailed critical feedback and demanded changes,
and then, when the author didn't "fix" things, threatened to force
the writer to hire an editor or a ghost writer, or just to kill the
book and demand repayment. None of which is particularly helpful to
the creative process, and seems more intended to get the author to
give up (or to give the publisher a way out) than anything else. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #123 of 231: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:06

    
Slipped by Jon. And while I think you may be onto something about
Amazon in general, I think that when it comes to books, they are
monopolists plain and simple. Sure there are little guys selling
books via amazon marketplace, but most of the books I see (and buy,
and sell) on amazon are coming from amazon. Plus which the last book
contract I signed had a special clause in it lowering my royalty on
books sold when the publisher has to give Amazon its special low
wholesale price, which i s like always.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #124 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:26

    

>119

Interesting little piece in a recent "New Yorker" on the challenges
involved in predicting the future. Snippet:

"Two things are true about “Toward the Year 2018.” First, most of
the machines that people expected would be invented have, in fact,
been invented. Second, most of those machines have had consequences
wildly different from those anticipated in 1968. It’s bad manners to
look at past predictions to see if they’ve come true. Still, if
history is any guide, today’s futurists have very little
credibility. An algorithm would say the same.

Carlos R. DeCarlo, the director of automation research at I.B.M.,
covered computers in the book, predicting that, in 2018, “machines
will do more of man’s work, but will force man to think more
logically.” DeCarlo was consistently half right. He correctly
anticipated miniature computers (“very small, portable storage
units”), but wrongly predicted the coming of a universal language
(“very likely a modified and expanded form of English”). One thing
he got terribly wrong: he expressed tragically unfounded confidence
that “the political and social institutions of the United States
will remain flexible enough to ingest the fruits of science and
technology without basic damage to its value systems.”

https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2019/01/07/what-2018-looked-like-fifty-year
s-ago
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #125 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:43

    
From my own corner of the publishing world, there is one major way
that Amazon has aided authors' incomes: the long tail availability
of older, back list books that simply would not be found on the
shelves of even the largest bricks and mortar store. And there is
one major way that Amazon has damaged authors' incomes: the one
click availability of used copies of books from the first day they
go on sale, directly cutting the author and publisher out of the
income stream from that book. 

My best guess is that in the case of my own books, the latter has
lowered my royalty income more than the former has augmented it. But
there's no way my books would be nearly as easily and broadly
purchasable, even on pub day, if Amazon didn't exist. Pre-Amazon,
I'd be lucky if a normal, independent bookstore ordered two copies
(poetry sections are not large); if they sold out, they would
usually not be re-stocked. And I'm with major NY publishing houses,
previously HarperCollins, now Knopf.

Of course in my field, even T.S. Eliot, Wallace Stevens, and
Elizabeth Bishop (at the end of her life, at the height of her fame
as a living poet) had day jobs. 

The one million-copy selling, NY Times #1 bestseller in recent
memory by a poet is Rupi Kaur, who built a following on Instagram
before being picked up by a press. That perhaps says something about
the future of self-supporting authorship, though not too much about
the future of the art form.

Ivan Illich's shadow work isn't something we've given a lot of
attention to in this conversation. But as mentioned much earlier
here, by T, a working ecosystem, whether biological or cultural,
lives by such uncharismatic, small-level, often unnoticed labors.  

 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #126 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:54

    
glad to see ivan illich mentioned here
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #127 of 231: James Bridle (stml) Tue 8 Jan 19 07:55

    
(Sidenote: Bruce earlier noted the largest ever hack of personal
information, and the culprit appears to be a 20 year old living with
his parents - he even used the same handle in online games as he did
to release the material:
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/jan/08/germany-data-breach-man-held-in-
suspected-hacking-case

"The BKA again said there was no evidence a foreign government had
been behind the attack, with initial reports pointing the finger at
Russia or China."

I'm reminded of possibly my favourite piece of unexpected
consequences from the last few years; how Mirai, the
botnet-of-a-thousand-nightmares, which infected the internet of
things and knocked the eastern seaboard offline, sparking fears of a
nation-state attack was a Minecraft prank gone wrong:
https://www.wired.com/story/mirai-botnet-minecraft-scam-brought-down-the-inter
net/

Next up: STUXNET was actually an ARG for a new Netflix show.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #128 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Tue 8 Jan 19 08:02

    

Ivan Illich...yes. Back in the day when there were truly independent
think-tanks (although that's not quite the right word for his
endeavor) not beholden to either donors or direct or indirect
corporate influence. The simple goal -- improving the quality of
life. "Medical Nemesis" was a breakthrough piece of research.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #129 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 8 Jan 19 10:59

    

cory, hello! nice to see you in here. 

i agree with much of what you wrote about the Authors Guild survey. like
jon, i'm on the fence about Amazon. it giveth and it taketh away.
 
> What are the characteristics of membership of
> the Author's Guild

jon, as i recall, they used to be very chummy and elitist. you could only
get in if you published with certain presses, or had X number of articles
in certain magazines they deemed worthy. if i sound grumpy, it's because
yeah, i wasn't fancy enough for them back in the day, and they turned down
my application. 

nowadays, it looks like they needed more members and began to allow in the
riffraff, including me. on the Authors Guild member site, conversation
threads pop up aboout self-publishing, small presses, vanity presses,
agents, the whole shebang. 

but AG is historically rooted in the sorts of
authors who could and did write for the big publishing houses, back when
that was a more viable business. they say hilariously snooty and out-of-
date stuff in the membership conversation threads. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #130 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 8 Jan 19 11:03

    

about ten years ago (?) i headed up a discussion at Wordstock, the
then-huge Portland literary festival. subject was something about the
demise of the book, and what e-books might do to literature and publishing. 

people were super into it. we had a nice panel and a huge room, standing
room only. book people *care*, ya know??

while i love books, book people, and some aspects of publishing, i found
myself playing devil's advocate. if the 20th century print publishing model
were to founder and fail, it might not be the fault of Amazon and
"user-generated content." 

it just *might* have something to do with how utterly ridiculous,
parochial, wasteful, and bizarre the old system was. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #131 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 19 11:19

    
Thanks, MagTiff! That confirms my suspicions... (and you slipped in
that other post, so I was responding to 129).

I suppose the state of the world shouldn't depend too much on Jeff
Bezos, but his company now owns the Washington Post and Whole Foods
Market, and he has another company attempting space travel. On the
plus side, I don't see any real nastiness under Amazon's roof.

It would be interesting to see assessments of the values of large
corporations, the sort of analysis that precedes alignment work. Not
just lists of companies that are "socially responsible," but a real
analysis of values based on actions and decisions. I know people who
assume that big for-profit corporations are inherently leaning to
the dark side, especially those who question the global economic
system as a whole. But I think the whole good/bad thing is
complicated...
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #132 of 231: Ari Davidow (ari) Tue 8 Jan 19 11:28

    
>On the plus side, I don't see any real nastiness under Amazon's
roof.

I guess that depends on whether or not you work for Amazon at a
minimum wage job or not. Their employees are part of the "can only
afford to work here if they get foodstamps" crowd. It gets worse, of
course. Amazon recently announced that they'd make the minimum
Amazon wage $15/hr, which sounds good, relatively speaking, except
that they cut other benefits, starting with the profit-sharing/stock
purchase plan that enabled some of those low-wage workers to get a
stake in Amazon's success. So, overall, a net loss for many workers.

Then, too, there are the people in spaces that Amazon coveted, whose
business were destroyed by Amazon using its size and deep pockets to
undercut them until they either sold to Amazon or went out of
business (I'm thinking of several mentioned in Brad Stone's book on
Amazon, "The Everything Store.)

I'm convinced that this is real nastiness, so must disagree. As with
many things, there is a point where enterprises go from "growing and
innovating" to "cancerous, crowding out others, crowding out
innovation, and killing us all." I think that Amazon is a current
member of the latter space. I don't think that is going to change in
2019.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #133 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 8 Jan 19 12:11

    
So much good and important stuff the last couple of days.  I think
it's worth remarking on the connection between the previous day's
topic of how AlphaZero "uses the whole board" and what Noah Redford
<108> and James Bridle <110> bring up about how much is going on
outside of the North America / Northern Europe viewpoint - hurtling
into the unknown and "change at the periphery."

I agree with Jane and <tvacorn> that climate is a whole different
order of problem-crisis.  I think there are some things that must be
addressed at scale urgently, and there are also some things that can
only be addressed well on the slower value-rich timeline of culture.

Two threads that have been resonating with me and I've wanted to
hear more about are <jonl>'s mention a couple of times of
worker-owned cooperatives and <magdalen>'s series of opening posts
about the journey from the liberal bubble city to a rural
borderland/transition zone.

> <112> My co-op does some of our web development work for large,
global corporations, and I often wonder what it would take to
convert those organizations to a more co-operative endeavor.  I've
never been
close to a large corporation that wasn't operated as a federation of
collaborative teams and divisions, so I tend to think they're really
not far off from what we're doing, though the general structure is
more of an oligarchy.

That's a tantalizing question and avenue.


I still don't know what I want to say about Tiff's posts, except
that your location, avenue of exploration, and approach seem to me
to be perhaps the most important one of all.  Generating something
from our own periphery... or more correctly, going back to the
biological metaphors, at the transition zone between two ecosystems.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #134 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 19 13:12

    
I'll concede there's nastiness at Amazon - I was thinking more at
the level of world-killing, climate-change-denying,
child-labor-employing, toxic-waste-dumping nastiness, but follow
this link for "7 Examples (and more) of How Amazon Treats Their
90,000+ Warehouse Employees Like Cattle"
https://www.pastemagazine.com/articles/2017/12/7-examples-how-amazon-treats-th
eir-90000-warehouse.html I wonder how a worker co-op would operate, doing the same kind of business?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #135 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 8 Jan 19 18:34

    

> at the transition zone between two ecosystems.

i found myself thinking about the people beyond the USA's borders today,
the good-spirited people who walk across giant deserts seeking asylum
mentioned above. when we talk about the State of the World, of course it is
important to think big, think broad, get around that globe, play the odd
corners with AlphaZero. it's important to recognize also how much privilege
and First World Problem mentality we bring to our stories.

yet there is also value in looking deeply at our own ground. (many Well
members and participants in this conversation are Americans, and many are
West Coast. and Austin. it's practically its own Coast, right?) those of us
with disabilities and unspectacular income levels, those of us sitting
right here raising the children and trying to make sense of our immediate
communities? we are unlikely to have a jet-setting-to-Dubai perspective. of
my own cohort, my friends who're in that category are nearly all white men,
successful in business or technology. i can think of two exceptions, both
highly educated women, one white, one black, neither with children. 

so if you are rooted and/or stuck in place, and that place thrums with
darkness and anger, and you can't escape it drinking champagne in First
Class... what then? for me, the answer is: go into the darkness. walk into
the anger. see what broils up that might be of use. get scared and humbled
but also educated by what's inside. then attempt to move it outward. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #136 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 19 02:27

    
Jane Hirshfield (jh)

As an aside, Bruce, I have trouble imagining how a person would
experience the "wow" moves of your proposed no-goal chess game. What
conveys the 'wow,' if there is no arc of direction-intention to the
moving? Never seen before? In dance choreography, novelty of
movement brings pleasure, sure, but not least because the limitation
of the human body is being challenged, and also because the history
of dance sits behind our acts of witness. In the case of a computer
playing a board game, wouldn't it all become entirely arbitrary and
meaningless? Constraint's breaking is a kind of pleasure--but only
if the constraint's presence is felt. The serotonin dopamine
explosion of aesthetic pleasure is dependent on there being *some*
context of customary expectation's transcending.


*Thanks for indulging my aesthetic issues here, Jane.

The problem you’re describing here —  the “arbitrary and
meaningless” issue —
was once rather nicely summed up in 1986 by noted musicologist
Morrissey of The Smiths, who wrote:

“Burn down the disco, hang the bloody DJ, because the music they
constantly play, has nothing to say about my life.”  

And indeed I get where he’s coming from.  Clearly there’s not much
direction-intention, or even physical instrument-playing virtuosity,
in a highly technical form of music that lacks emotional lyrics and
is mostly made of repetitive loops, samples and the occasional
innovative sound-design honk, beep or squonk.  

However, I listen to rather of lot of techno dance music and its
associated minigenres of house, neurofunk, drumnbass, jungle, etc
etc, mostly because I’m trying to figure out what you could say
critically about them that might be broadly helpful.  Given how much
human element they’re missing, why and how are they good?  Because,
even though they’re not Morrissey, they’re plenty popular, and
lastingly so.  They’re supporting Ibiza’s economy, even — there are
discos here 50 years old.

Very similar problems apply to abstract motion graphics based in
code art, like say the visual code-art works of “Lia.”  Why don’t
you just watch a real movie, where the boy kisses the girl and
there’s some cool action scenes? Where's there's conflict, something
that matters?

Well, we’re very keen on the creative work of Lia at Share Festival
in Turin, so the natural question is, like, why her and not somebody
else?  Is she “good?”  Yeah, she is, but why?  She’s never up on
stage emoting like Morrissey.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #137 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 19 02:28

    


One compelling reason might be that Lia’s just plain there.  She
exists. “Lia” is that rare creature, a professional code artist. 
She quit her day job teaching new-media in an Austrian design school
and now Lia survives on… well… embossed coffee-cups, lecture fees
and kickstarter, I guess.  She does derive some revenue from
“SeditionArt.com,” which is a commercial gallery for works of
digital art.

*So here are the commercially available code-art works of Lia.  I
myself “own” a lot of these, or at least I paid modest sums of money
so that I have the rights to display them on devices.  Lia gets a
50% royalty, and I’m keen to keep the former professor busy in her
code-art racket.  It gives me something nice to think about.

https://www.seditionart.com/lia

I do like these artworks, just in the simple sense of my sincere
fondness for abstract motion-graphics.  But I own lots, mostly so
that I can enjoy trying to figure out which is the “best” one.  

I’m pretty sure I could sit down and rank them as my personal
favorites, from 1-44, in half an hour.  Not a big problem — I know
what I like.

But what would I *say* about them that would justify that? What kind
of aesthetic argument can I make?  “If you want to own the best Lia
work, wow, you should buy that one.”  That’s possible, am I right? 
People can assess Jackson Pollack canvases. It’s “action painting,”
you know, you want the splatters.  Any proper gallerist ought to be
able to advise you on that.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #138 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 19 02:29

    


So the business with the chess analogy is me attempting to strip
this problem down to something more conceptual, less human-centric. 


So imagine you’re in a big dark installation, like, say, a big disco
that Morrissey just burned down.  And there are big columns of
colored light in there, from the disco’s light-show special FX.  And
the tall, glowing lights move around you in the space.

The first time, they just float colorfully and randomly.  But the
second time, they begin in two neat ranks, and then they make
various different short motions on what seems to be a grid.  
Sometimes, two collide and one vanishes, until they’re almost all
gone.  

Even if you didn’t recognize this display as a chess game, it would
surely be prettier than the random, arbitrary and meaningless
lights.  If you had those two graphic motion displays going in two
adjacent rooms, the audience would leave the random room and go into
the chess-simulation room.  Because it’s just more engaging, there’s
more to talk about, it’s cooler, it’s got more frisson, it’s just
more artistic.

Eventually, you could run a hundred different light-show chess games
in a row, and the unwearied and always-interested viewers ought to
able to declare, “Wow, #47 was pretty awesome while #32 just wasn’t
as good.”  Without knowing that #47 is Capablanca Vs Alekhine 1927
while #32 was Carlsen vs Caruana 2018.  

They’d come up with a new aesthetic for this generative art
experience, in other words.  But what aesthetic is that?  What’s it
about?

Special bonus: me, way back in 2013 trying to give a pep talk to
media artists who do code graphics.  Basically it’s me riffing at
them, “Well, I sure take you guys seriously; can’t quite tell you
why, though.”  

People in an unusual and innovative line of work appreciate a
back-patting, but really, I ought to be able to tell them why.

https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1636630114/clouds-interactive-documentary

  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #139 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 19 06:01

    
*More from Noah Raford, who offers a music recommendation.

From: Noah Raford

The other thing I wanted to add is man, this revolution is going to
be funky. All the best parties happen in the dark. 

All you need to do is listen to some of the music coming out of the
cracks right now to get a feel for the celebration that is coming. 

Yes, times are tough and will get tougher, but when the going gets
tough, the tough start to party (to paraphrase good old Hunter S.).

Have a listen to some of the crazy amazing music coming out these
days. It’s the sound track to the crumbling 20th Century and will
gives a hint at all the fun, grey market things to come. 

Nyege Nyege Festival 2018 (in Uganda)
https://youtu.be/QMtobL0TwLQ

If the future looks like Nyege Nyege, bring it on, baby! The worse
it gets the funkier it will be. 

Let’s not forget that even woolly old Dark Mountain started as a
festival and all the best house parties happen in squats. 

Unlike the US (where Bruce rightly points out that more people are
above the age of 60 than below 25), the opposite is true in the
places where the future is really happening. Half of the continent
of Africa is under 16 and boy, are they going to want to party. 

There will still be rocket barons and space sheiks making grand
plans, but for most of us, we either succumb to VR intoxicated self
pity and prescription  or rip off the headsets and join the bonfire.


The future is going to be one big squat party. In times of sorrow,
what else can we do but sing? 

Best,
Noah 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #140 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Wed 9 Jan 19 06:18

    
Well, now I'm going to have to add neurofunk to my ever-growing list
of neurologisms. Thanks Bruce. 

And thanks Noah, this is the State of the World, not just USA and
EU. Nevertheless, I have more to say about the USA. Leonard Cohen
said we like it dark (and he had the wisdom to die the day before
the US election). 

In the 80s and 90s University of Hawaii professor Fred Riggs wrote
several articles arguing that Presidentialist political systems are
prone to authoritarianism.
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/019251218800900401

Maybe prone is not the right word. At one point, according to his
analysis, out of 33 Presidentialist systems, 32 had become
dictatorships. I'll leave you to figure out the one that didn't (at
that point). The only thing that has kept the US from fulfilling the
destiny of its political system structure is the adherence to
democratic norms. Those norms have held back the dogs of structure
for some time. 

I also attended a conference at UT Austin organized by Sandy
Levinson in January 2013, titled "Is America Governable?" The answer
of a group of staid, sober constitutional law professors, Brookings
researchers and such, was...NO!

Well, SOTW, here we are in 2019, with a normless and gormless and
formless leader, and his followers. I'm not sure we can rescue the
US from it's systematic destiny at this point. The Gov Futures Lab
at IFTF held what we called the ReConstitutional Convention in April
2013 that brought together a wide group of thinkers and doers who
cared about political systems designs to try and prepare for the
coming transition and to have new governing ideas to experiment
with, rather than falling back on tribalism, theocracy, or worse, as
happened after the Arab Spring. 

A movement of social inventors is what we were and are trying to
catalyze. And as we get closer to the day when those inventions will
be necessary, our urgency needs to be amplified. Noah points out,
rightly, that other places are getting along, for better or worse,
and thinking about brighter futures, rather than cursing the
darkness. And yet the energy that is about to be released from the
US will spill out and ripple through the entire planet. 

To me, for the US, we are beyond sustaining the system. Trump only
exposed and exploited the weaknesses, he did not cause them. We are
facing a near-term system fork of transformation or collapse. My
money is on collapse (which Dator sometimes calls "silver linings"),
but my brain and heart are working toward transformation. And if
it's not coming from the US champagne supernova, hopefully we won't
get in the way of the future happening elsewhere. 

Fork well, and prosper. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #141 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 9 Jan 19 07:11

    
Jeremy Smith, a very smart former Army engineer, gave a talk last
night at an EFF-Austin meeting. EFF-Austin is a cyber liberties
organization, the only attempted chapter of the Electronic Frontier
Foundation. Bruce and I have both been involved with it over the
years, and I'm still on the Board of Directors. I had invited Jeremy
to talk about Register2Vote, a 501c4 that's built a web-based
platform (MapTheVote, https://mapthe.vote) to extend voter
registration more or less organically via the social graphs of its
users - the virtual equivalent of word of mouth. The system combines
data about citizens, where they live, and whether they've registered
to vote. Via MapTheVote, you can see who's not registered in your
neighborhood. You can wander over and encourage them to register. If
you're a licensed volunteer deputy registrar (VDR), you can walk
your neighborhood and register people then and there.

They've started with Texas, but there are plans to build out
technology to support other locales. The idea is to make sure
everybody has an option to vote, where registration is required. 

The same organization built a web app called Register2Vote
(https://register2vote.org/) that makes it easy to register. Because
legally, you can't register online in Texas, the app gathers the
information to create and print the voter registration form, mails
it to you to sign and date, and makes it easy to mail to the proper
authorities.

Once people register to vote, the challenge for all parties is to
get their advocates to the polls.  I saw during the midterms that
Democrats were using an app called MiniVAN to drive their
get-out-the-vote canvassing efforts. In the past, they would carry
paper - lists and maps - but MiniVAN provides a list of people who
voted in past Democratic primaries, along with maps, to facilitate
the canvassing efforts. Here's info about that app:
https://blog.ngpvan.com/team-canvassing-minivan  I'm sure
Republicans have something similar. Less sure how actively the
Libertarian and Green parties are canvassing.

The state of politics today in the US owes much to the fact that a
lot of people don't vote, especially in midterms. Here's a
reference: https://www.fairvote.org/voter_turnout#voter_turnout_101
~60% vote in presidential years, ~40% for midterms. Citizen
engagement is persistently relatively low, voter apathy is a
problem, and more recently, vulnerability to toxic memes has driven
voters to make what ill-informed decisions (understatement). 

I'm not sure there's a uniform definition of what it means for
politics or government to "work," given the diverse and polarized
opinions about what's what. But I think these uses of technology are
a step in the right direction. But it's not enough to make sure
everybody's voting, if they don't understand the implications of
their vote. So I think the next step, behind the work that guys like
Jeremy are doing, is more of a challenge: engaging and informing
potential voters at all levels, cutting through the political noise
and helping them to fact-based decisions. 

This is a US-centric post, and I appreciate that we're talking about
the state of the world. I think activists in support of the American
form of representative democracy, despite current evidence of its
corruptability, believe that it's what's best for the rest of the
world. Is that true? Are we better off driving governance with the
wisdom of crowds? The Trump era's given us an opportunity to
consider whether we'd rather have an authoritarian regime, and it's
surprising how many US citizens are ready to go that route. Where
would we be if we'd elected a more competent version of Trump? Is
his administration an anomaly or a trend? And what of the ascendance
of authoritarian leaders elsewhere in the world?

Listening to Jeremy speak last night - a super-competent, very wise
tech-savvy fair-minded hard-working person trying to make things
better by making politics more fair, I was feeling hopeful.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #142 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Wed 9 Jan 19 08:14

    
Bruce, interesting reply, and I almost referenced Pollock in my own
earlier post--I remember so distinctly the moment, long ago now,
when one of his canvasses transformed for me, as I looked at it, and
I suddenly entered the pleasure of it, which had been closed to me
until that moment. I was altered, permanently--which is one of the
more central functions of art, for me: that moment when new
possibilities of being fling themselves open. Not the only function,
but one of them.

But you were talking in your original post (the one I was answering)
about a potential increased "wow" factor in watching a computer play
a game of chess in which there was no longer the concept of winning
at all. Think of the moves possible then!  In your defense of the
arbitrary's beauty, you still use the word "game." And if there's a
game, there are rules that give it its pleasure. That's all I'm
saying.

The beauties of arbitrary or chance construction can be
considerable. (As can the unbeauties.) Our brains and senses evolved
to find certain experiences entrancing, and the range of those
experiences is broad. The ripples of a river running over rocks is
more satisfying than some ever-repeating single pattern. The
predictable becomes boring, and eventually invisible. 

The music is called "neurofunk" because there's a connection to our
neural response to it.

But that wasn't what I was replying to and questioning. I understood
you to be saying that the "wow" of the *chess moves* could be even
larger. That particular kind of "wow" might be replaced by another
kind of aesthetic pleasure--but it's no longer the wow of the chess
game gaining more possibilities, when it isn't a chess game. The
pattern-generating is coming from some other process.

The intersection of aesthetics and decisions about how to live in
our shared world and its many cultures might be an interesting area
to explore. Does an increasingly non-hierarchical sense of painting
and music foster cooperative corporations as a possibility, for
instance? Does the aesthetic valuing of the uncharismatic object and
ordinary moment, in and for itself, change our sense of what is
"meaningful" in larger ways? Does the possibility of equality and
tenderness between humans increase when we find the "flawed" more
lovely than the "perfect"? I would wager that it does, though I
doubt I'm able to make a non-intuitive case for that.



 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #143 of 231: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Wed 9 Jan 19 08:21

    
Good God but that's a brilliant post, Jane, full of questions that
are more interesting than any answers would be.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #144 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Wed 9 Jan 19 09:47

    
Climate change has been mentioned a number of times. It’s really the
game changer as analysts like to say, the elephant in the room as
Jane has pointed out. Allowing the mainstream media to define the
semantics and the tone was probably not ideal. The term itself is a
euphemism when it needs to be a powerful meme and more accurately
descriptive. Margery Eagan of Boston Public Radio has suggested
“climate disruption” which moves the needle a bit more. But I was
pleased to hear Nancy Pelosi use the term “climate crisis” in a
recent press briefing.

Just a quick level set as we like to say in tech: a few things that
were mentioned but will hopefully get more airtime. These are all
major factors and not simple externalities in the futurist's
toolbox. No picture of the future can be complete without
considering them:

-- CRISPR and designer babies (new cover story, Time magazine)
-- The viability and ethics of brain/machine research
-- Smartphones, VR and their effects on community and social
cohesion
-- Exit strategies from the surveillance society
-- The limitations of social media and future direction

Further, I’m not convinced that the global/local meme is out of
steam either politically or otherwise. This needs to dovetail with
the climate crisis dialogue in the sense that highly disruptive
events will continue to happen in local pockets thereby shifting the
emphasis for remediation back to the local level. This may seem
obvious but has lots of secondary implications. In “Digital
Mythologies” I argued that tools for electronic democracy should be
leveraged locally first rather than in maximum participant large
tents like FB. But of course the market gravitated towards
large-scale approaches that were simply more profitable. No surprise
there. That said, there’s a still great opportunity for more
software tools to be developed that take the challenges of localism
into account --- robust tools for organizing, self-help, disaster
recovery, local funding and so forth.  Nextdoor is a start but IMO
there's a world of opportunity in this space and it’s puzzling that
it took so long to develop.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #145 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 9 Jan 19 10:44

    
Bruce and Jane, I think what you're both trying to get regarding the
game might be covered by James Carse in his Finite and Infinite
Games.
<https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/Finite-and-Infinite-Games/James-Carse/9
781476731711>

I don't have it at hand, but the difference between the two for him
begins with finite games having winners and losers and infinite
games being played with the point of expanding the field of
available possibilities (and generating their pleasure and meaning
from same).
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #146 of 231: Kieran O'Neill (oneillk) Wed 9 Jan 19 11:28

    
Thank you all for this discussion! I'm following along as I have for
probably the last decade, and even signed up with the Well to take
part.

I'm very interested in the swing to "New Dark" by Bruce, and all the
talk of the Dark Mountain Project and Ivan Illich, especially in a
discussion led by the very founders of the Viridian Design Movement.
(For what it's worth, I think these are all important sides of the
environmentalist movement.)


@Tom, I completely agree about the need to shift away from social
media for local organisation, and I'm sure there's room for
localised social media networks to aid with things like disaster
recovery.

That said, there are some quite mature and well-used tools for local
political organisation. The community bike shop I'm involved with
uses and open-source tool called CiviCRM. A great many other orgs,
both large and small, use NationBuilder. Speaking locally, the
tenants union in my city managed to spin up over two years from
nothing into a major force in municipal politics. This was heavily
aided by having their own tool for constituent engagement.

So the tools exist, they've been around for nearly a decade, and
they are in widespread use. And they are the exact opposite of (big)
social media -- just humans contacting humans, a single, siloed
database per organisation, and no algorithms trying to manipulate
users' emotions. You just don't hear about them as much.


Regarding CRISPR babies, He Jiankui's bumbled attempt this year was
classic TED Talk/Silicon Valley/techbro hubris. There's a great
article tearing apart the actual science here:
http://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2018/11/28/after-such-knowledge

(It's still a thing on the horizon, though, for sure.)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #147 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Wed 9 Jan 19 11:41

    

Excellent Kieran. Good to know and thanks for pointing that out. I
hope they gain more mind share and traction going forward.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #148 of 231: Matthew Battles (jonl) Wed 9 Jan 19 14:36

    
Via email from Matthew Battles:

I'm struck by the sense that an AlphaZero game is the 2D shadow of
something happening in a multi-dimensional space. This is an
aesthetic of shadows, a light-show aesthetic; we've come back to the
shadows dancing on the wall of the cave.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #149 of 231: Pamela McCorduck (pamela) Wed 9 Jan 19 15:03

    
Nicely put, Natthew Battles.

AlphaZero is a champion at two-person games where all information is
known. Breathtaking, in its limited way.

Life is not two-person, nor is all information known.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #150 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 19 00:51

    

"Life is not two-person, nor is all information known."

*That’s entirely true, Pamela, and yet deep-learner AIs can beat the
crap out of people in games that have lots of human players and also
big random and hidden elements.  Doesn’t seem to be any deal-breaker
for 'em; Deep Mind’s other engines can’t play “Capture the Flag” as
well as their AlphaZero engine plays chess, but they can play it
quite well, and even brag about it in the ol’ blog here.

https://deepmind.com/blog/capture-the-flag/

*Bots, even pretty modest and simple ones, can play all kinds of
video games that are formally impossible to solve, computer-science
wise.

https://venturebeat.com/2018/12/29/a-look-back-at-some-of-ais-biggest-video-ga
me-wins-in-2018/

*There are even people who enjoy watching AIs playing multiplayer
shoot-em-up games on social media.  

*I can remember when it seemed a little weird that people would
passively watch a role-paying game rather than participating in it,
but now “Twitch” is major-league media.  There are armies of sports
fans on the couch for sports that are played on the couch.  Makes
you wonder, eh?

https://www.twitch.tv
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #151 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 19 00:52

    

*The European Parliament still likes to do some broad, across
the-board “office of technology assessment” riffing with their
“European Parliament Research Service.”   If you’re into that,
here’s a whole bunch of it for 2019.  Very deliberately trendy: it’s
got  trade wars, ocean plastics, income disparity, Brexit, potential
Euro finance crises: all kinds of stuff you’ll find this year in
European newspapers, if there are any newspapers left.

http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/IDAN/2019/630352/EPRS_IDA(2019)63
0352_EN.pdf

*And this is the way they talk, which is a very lucid and
well-educated Euro-English Brussels bureaucratese.  You know they're
in government because they use the term "cyberspace," which has
become a very dignified, somberly-serious and governmental word
nowadays.

“The  digital  revolution  has  transformed  our  lives,  offering 
huge  opportunities  but  also  presenting challenges,  such  as 
how  to  protect  people  from  risks  and  threats inherent to a
digitalised world (see issue 10). Cyberspace represents a perfect
playground for criminals: the number of cyber-attacks is increasing
and they are becoming ever more sophisticated. To give just two
examples: every day  more  than  6 million data  records are  lost 
or  stolen  worldwide  and  over  4 000 ransomware attacks   are  
launched.   These   attacks   affect   our   critical  
infrastructure,  such  as  hospitals,  transport  and information 
systems,  and  cost the  European  economy  hundreds  of  billions 
of  euros.  In  some  EU  countries,  half  of  all  crimes 
committed are cybercrimes.  
 
“Not only is  cybercrime on the rise, but traditional crime is also
going digital. Organised crime groups use the internet for multiple
activities, such as drug trafficking, counterfeiting of means of
payment and  credit  card  fraud,  trafficking  in  human  beings, 
etc.  Despite  some  major  takedowns  by  law  enforcement, illicit
marketplaces flourish on the darknet to sell drugs, weapons,
counterfeit goods, fake identity documents or cybercrime 'toolkits',
that are ready for use by less experienced attackers ('crime  as  a 
service').  There  is  a  high  risk  that  terrorists  may  use 
these  easily  available  tools  to  perpetrate  a  cyber-attack, 
e.g.  in  order  to  target  critical  infrastructure…. “ 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #152 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Thu 10 Jan 19 07:04

    
Welcome to the WELL Kieran!

I'm glad you brought up the tools for local social political
organization.

>So the tools exist, they've been around for nearly a decade, and
they are in widespread use. And they are the exact opposite of (big)
social media -- just humans contacting humans, a single, siloed
database per organisation, and no algorithms trying to manipulate
users' emotions. You just don't hear about them as much.

One of the most striking aspects of 2018 in the US has been where we
are starting to hear about them, in the explosive growth of
effective political engagement, from the Women's March to special
election upsets and finally the 2018 midterm results.  While the
story about 2016 is all about nefarious big-data social manipulation
of emotions for election results, it's the tools you mention, used
by ordinary people, that underly 2018.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #153 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Thu 10 Jan 19 07:08

    
It's also really interesting to juxtapose that point with the EU
report quote about traditional crime going digital.  Just humans
being humans as they always have, with new tools.  

And it's a good time to bring up a topic I've followed this year but
we haven't mentioned yet, where the broad fear of internet crime
(and a totalitarian impulse perhaps?) resulted in bad law and
internet censorship - the FOSTA/SESTA (anti sex-trafficking) attack
on Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act (which protects
websites from being treated as publishers and thus liable for
content).  

EFF summary:
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/03/how-congress-censored-internet>
EFF lawsuit:
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2018/06/eff-sues-invalidate-fosta-unconstitution
al-internet-censorship-law>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #154 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 19 07:51

    
Listening to birdsong & a distant train whistling and rumbling, it's
hard in this moment to sink into virtual communities, abstract
online worlds, technical infrastructures, etc. Twitchy cardinal on
the fence outside, now flown away. Seeing a heart with wings, ready
to fly.

Austin's Homebrew Website Club met last night, planning Austin's
second IndieWebCamp (https://indieweb.org/IndieWebCamps), which will
be February 23-24 (https://indieweb.org/2019/Austin). Homebrew
Website Club meetings and IndieWebCamp events are global:
https://indieweb.org/Events There's a movement slowly building to
create an independent web by creating technologies to facilitate
publishing and sharing online in a distributed way, as an
alternative to corporate social media platforms like Facebook and
Twitter. We're not talking about something new here - this is the
web we thought we were building, before "the stacks" realized the
opportunity to make big profits via social sharing platforms.
IndieWeb is driven by a smart developers who are building
independent, distributed tools for sharing and interaction. I'm
plugging IndieWeb (as I have in the past) because I think it's an
important movement, creating an alternative to corporate social
media cages.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #155 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 10 Jan 19 08:51

    
Lots of things to ponder from this last batch of posts, and yes,
Kieran, welcome to the Well. 

(keta, your post about finite and infinite games concept was the
perfect clarification, thank you.)

When we talk about the State of the World, it is almost inevitable
that we move to large, visible, human-contract/governance/social
compact level things.  There is a great deal of knowledge here of
specifics I'm grateful to hear about. I also greatly enjoyed the
moment with your cardinal just now, jonl. It is no small part of
what liberty/ equality/ fraternity are for--the continuance into the
future of such quiet moments, free from fear, from hunger, from too
much heat or cold, from the buffetings of cravings and ramped up
angers that don't serve us or those we love or the larger community
well.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #156 of 231: Kieran O'Neill (oneillk) Thu 10 Jan 19 13:07

    
Thank you for the welcomes!

And yes, Rip, there's been a huge upswing in political engagement
over the past few years. The Corbynite revolution in the UK has been
another example. It's really exhilarating!


I've been trying, over the past few days, to frame my thoughts
around Dark Mountain, and why I think it's important. I finally came
to the answer this morning, when I was linked this beautiful and
tender article relating cycling advocacy work to inter-generational
trauma:
https://www.yesmagazine.org/peace-justice/haunted-streets-20180518  



There's a lot to be outraged about this past year -- the climate
(and the rest of the environment) is in crisis, the global wealthy
are getting ever-wealthier on the backs of the global working class,
there are monsters in the Whitehouse (and Westminster) mashing all
the oppression buttons at once. Outrage isn't all bad -- it fuels
the activism that effects change. But outrage is also easy to
manipulate, and played a big part in the electoral manipulations of
2016. Outrage fatigue is also very, very real.

So what I realised is this: writing like that Do Jun Lee article, or
the work you find in the Dark Mountain journal, engages with
activism in a gentle, tender, human way. It's the antidote to the
permanent fight-or-flight onslaught of outrage. A way of dealing
with issues through story and empathy and feeling.

What I feel 2018 has brought, and 2019 will bring more of, is
increasing awareness among activists of the need for self-care. Of
the need to "go into the darkness" as Tiffany put it. To engage with
feelings in a safe environment where they can be turned over, felt
through, and processed. I believe we're seeing that in the desire to
pull back from social media, and in the need for more human
engagement in politics.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #157 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 10 Jan 19 14:40

    
Thanks for this post, and the link to that informing, rounding
piece. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #158 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Thu 10 Jan 19 18:50

    

Keiran, wellcome to the Well! i hope you're finding some conferences that
suit your conversational tastes.

jane, your response #142 above is magnificent, particularly the final graf.
"The intersection of aesthetics and decisions about how to live in
 our shared world and its many cultures ..." so much to chew on.

tom and keiran, thank you for the perspective on organizing tools for local
use that don't necessarily rely on the surveillance economy and social
media. i've swung so far against social, so disgusted by what our
technology is doing to our culture and minds and children, that i can kinda
forget about the good things. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #159 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 11 Jan 19 00:36

    

*When you’re a philosopher who’s way into video games you get into
stuff like “procedural rhetoric.”  

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Procedural_rhetoric

 Because there are, like, procedures… or processes… or maybe
algorithms… and when the game designer puts these procedures into
the experience, that’s expressive.  You’re involved in my game world
now, and even though the apparent “world” is really just a stark and
simplified 2d bunch of linked processes, it’s perceived as a world
by the gamer.  Like reading a novel that’s “just a bunch of
sentences,” but, you know, the perception of a world emerges there,
and it matters to people.

So, clearly my problem with the aesthetics of generative art is tied
in with this Ian Bogost idea somehow, only I’m less interested in
the “persuasive rhetoric.”  I’m more interested in “what is it that
the processes are doing that gives the artistic frisson.”  My
feeling is that the process itself has an aesthetic that we might
call “processuality,” as in, wow, what a pretty process.  And why is
the process pretty?  Well, it’s got a certain frost-forming
loveliness about what happens with kinetic elements deployed in
space and time. 

 And if we had algorithmic new aesthetic, we’d be able to make
useful critical judgements about processuality.  This chess game is
prettier than that one; this Lia code art piece is better than that
one; that robot dances better than the other robot.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #160 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 11 Jan 19 00:38

    


Up to this point in tech-art development, there’s been a whole lot
of hacker-value involved in the artwork, because  technology art is
hard to describe and think about, and also technically difficult and
expensive to create.  You get into the Prof Casey Reas territory of
“the thing that makes the thing is more interesting than the thing,”
and while I don’t have a big problem with MIT hackers getting way
into the hacker-ness, I also know that eventually the interest of
technical novelty itself must wear out.  

The cutting-edge tech coolness will become corny and old-fashioned,
and then you have to find some critical merit in the artwork as
artwork.  Like, what’s inherently interesting about it?  If it’s
“generated” by an algorithmic process, rather than directly inscribe
by the hand, why is it an artwork at all, why is it life-enhancing,
why is it nice to be in the room with it, what is the nature of the
appeal?

In the case of kinetic art, I think maybe the stripped-down
proof-of-concept is not the chess-game but the desk toy.  Desk toys
are not games, you don’t win them, there’s no contest or
scorekeeping,  they’re not rhetorically convincing you of anything,
they’re not political (unless they’re like, annoyingly expensive
capitalist “Executive” desk toys)….  I don’t think they’re even
“fun,” for more than a few minutes.  They just do kinetic stuff, the
little desk-toys; they’re a consolation of some kind.

The decorative hourglass, the little steel globes on the wires that
click each other, the multicolored drippy gel frames, the chaotic
wheel with the magnet in the base, maybe the baby wind-up crib
mobile (since baby doesn’t have a desk-job yet)…. Something about
them cheers me up; they’re the existence proof that people are
beguiled by process, by a non-human choreography.    

And the truth is, there’s gonna be a whole lot of autonomous stuff
going on around us that’s not performed by humans.  A megaton of
“procedural rhetoric,” really beating us over the head.   We
certainly need a better perceptual grip on all that.  We need to
know when it's ugly.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #161 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Fri 11 Jan 19 07:27

    

Thanks Tiffany. Appreciate your comments.

Bruce I'd be very interested to hear your perspectives on the
climate crisis. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #162 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 11 Jan 19 08:07

    
In the 90s, when I was more involved with digital art and artists
(partly via EFF-Austin's cyberarts posse), we weren't focused on
technologies and algorithms for producing artwork. It was more about
network facilitation of collaborative art processes. I was connected
with the late Bob "Bazooka" Anderson here in Austin, and he was
plugged into a network art community called OTIS, which was later
renamed SITO. (I'm ditzing on the expansion of the acronym.) We were
also hanging out with the Robot Group, including Brooks Coleman -
who were producing robotic art mashups. They had a house band,
Liquid Mice, where Brooks was the gonzo percussionist. They were
repurposing tech objects and robotic concepts as various art
objects, some of which were kinetic and loud, others more
conceptual. The frisson in that case was driven by ironic
fascination.

Algorithms are just another way that humans organize and produce
aesthetic manifestations. Technology is just tool-making, driven in
part by science, adaptable for aesthetic purpose. If a machine built
a machine that built another machine to produce art, the origin is
always human. Technology in general emerges from human origins, one
reason why I don't buy the Skynet/Colossus mythology, runaway
artificial intelligence seeking to subjugate or obliterate puny
humans.

We could as readily argue that an artificial intelligence would
develop, not a propensity for command and control, but a will to
produce aesthetic objects. A Skynet that replicates as
poetic/musical/visual aesthetic algorithms, a machine that mimics
its human creators by developing an appreciate for beauty, creative
manipulation of order.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #163 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 11 Jan 19 09:57

    
three interesting posts, these.

I'm not sure I would quite be on board with "desk toy" = "art",
though I'm not keen on fencing-off definitions of "art," either. I'd
agree that it's in the shared aesthetic-pleasure neighborhood.

Rhetoric is, for me, a fascinating lens to look at anything through.
I'd say that Bogost is spot-on in saying there are
non-language-based rhetorics embodied in the worlds of games, just
as there are non-language-based rhetorics embodied in the world.
Culture is a rhetoric. "Reality" is a rhetoric. It persuades me of
many things I might not have understood were it possible not to
interact with it. 

But video games and virtual realities are optional. So they not only
have their own rhetorical persuasions, they are designed to lure you
into the playing of them in the first place. And have been pretty
successful at that. (Though I will confess what is obvious: not my
own realm at all.)

What do our futurists here think humanity, as a species and set of
cultures, has learned / gained, by the amount of time it has
invested in the designing of, and then the playing of, these kinds
of games and these types of art? What have we been persuaded of? Is
it like young animals playing at tasks that will later be applied to
increased survival-- that the playing increases computer programming
skills? Is it an altered ethical realm that increases (or decreases)
our sense of empathy, kinship, our ability to live with or want to
eliminate those both like and unlike us?  Is it, for the
non-designer participant, skill building in ways that continue
outside of the game? How did Second Life alter First Life?

I'm sure this is kindergarten-level stuff for many of you. But it
does go to that perennial question of how much we humans have
changed with the precipitously changed world we have created and now
inhabit, a world in which what was once a realm with groups of
people sitting around a card table trying to glimpse some tell in
one another's bodies is now... pretty different.

What experiences is it we want from our games, from our arts, from
the shapes of what we see and hear when we look and listen, and why
has our species, so long as it's existed, wanted those experiences?
And does it want something different now from what it did 100, 1000,
10,000 years ago?







 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #164 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Fri 11 Jan 19 10:23

    

Great questions and framing Jane.

>We could as readily argue that an artificial intelligence would
develop, not a propensity for command and control, but a will to
produce aesthetic objects.

If only...but is there time to allow this "aging of the wine" to
take place? Can creators create something that transcends their own
limitations? Given that any such evolution might inherently become
"out of control" to use Kevin Kelly's phrase and assuming it might
even be possible, how big a Las Vegas gamble might that constitute
in a world racing towards an unstable and uncertain future?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #165 of 231: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Fri 11 Jan 19 12:18

    
Isn't the problem that we make things just because we can, not
because they're needed, and then try to figure out what to do with
them.  And that Silicon Valley, with its endless resources, is like
a very powerful and competitive baby, putting together the next
bright shiny thing without a thought of side effects.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #166 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 12 Jan 19 01:18

    

*Meanwhile, on the sculpture front of the New Aesthetic, here’s Prof
Golan Levin’ s  course on algorithmic, generative, parametric
objects, from 2015.

http://golancourses.net/2015/lectures/parametric-3d-form/

*So, okay, these generative “objects” are not chess games, desk
toys, motion graphics, expressive video games, dancing robots or any
of those other more or less arty phenomena that I’ve been going on
about for days now.  These are physical objects, robot-chiseled out
of wood, melted  and spewed toothpaste-style, whatever.

*And they’re analog, material, permanent.  Some of them could last
centuries.  So how do you assess them aesthetically?  Like which
ones are kinda cool, and the inventor deserves an award, and they
oughta be sold on Kickstarter… and which ones are dispiritingly
hideous, resource-consuming “crapjects” that shouldn’t exist in the
first place?  A kind of physicalized email-spam.  That’s what you
get when production costs are low or free and there’s no standards
of production.

*Even if you have a rather educated taste in this subject, and you
have some pretty strong intuitions about it, because you’ve been
standing next to smelly 3DPrinters for 15 years — how could you
compose a reasonable aesthetic manifesto that would convince other
people? 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #167 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 12 Jan 19 01:30

    

*Of course I’ve got a vested interest in all this, since I am the
art director of Share Festival, the Turinese technology art fair. 
Pretty soon our jury will be meeting, and this year it even includes
“Lia,” who has agreed to join us.  If you want to propose an artwork
for our fair, there’s the link.  The theme this year is “Ghosts.”

https://www.toshareproject.it/tshr/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Share%20Prize%20
XII_Ghosts_eng.pdf


*So when we’re in these tech-art jury meetings, even if there’s only
five or  maybe six of us at the table (if you count the ghost), we
have to tackle some severely abstruse questions.  Such as: “Which of
these is better for our Italian public — this politically satirical
design-fiction video about an imaginary form of social media, or
this 3DPrinted open-source Swiss pocket watch?”  

Actual money and artistic credibility rides on this.  Not a whole
lot, but you know, some.

I’d certainly like to get better at it.  Who knows, maybe some day I
might have to teach it.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #168 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sat 12 Jan 19 07:21

    
An interesting thing happened to me on my way through reading the
professor's course description linked in <166>.  Before I clicked on
the link, I could clearly see that Bruce had asked,

>So how do you assess them aesthetically? 

But by the time I was done, and had had many interesting thoughts in
response to both the question and the course description, I came
back and was completely surprised to see aesthetics - somehow I had
transformed the question to *ethics*.  I think there's something
instructive in that, and it's useful to answer the question you
didn't ask, as well as the one you did.

My short answer to how do you assess the ethics of creating
parametric objects is to look at the work being done on biomimicry. 
Biomimicry is industrial designers asking, "How would nature do it?"
and my suggestion is to google "Biomimicry ethics" and look at
pretty much anything that comes up for a good start.

What happens when you start trying to use nature as model is that
you may soon find yourself using nature as measure.  You're not just
looking for cool new tricks for better design, you're asking if what
you are designing fits in with the rest of life.  And then from
there, you eventually get to nature as mentor (which, if you go back
to my post <86> is an aspect of what keeps me up at night).
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #169 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sat 12 Jan 19 07:24

    
So now to try to respond to the actual question, what makes an
*aesthetics* of [parametric] objects?  From the professor:

>>A parametric object is a “meta-form”: a mutable or variable
object, produced by a set of rules, whose properties are governed or
articulated by the values of certain variables or parameters. Change
the values of the variables — and the form changes in response. 

The first still illustration reminded me of diatoms or coral.  The
first video illustration reminded me of a sea anemone - perhaps a
sea anemone learning "what works - what attracts something for me to
eat?" trying out variations.

So what is obviously missing there is an other half to an
evolutionary pair.  It's a picture of an antelope without a wolf to
make it faster.  That might suggest that the work is "calling" for
its predator or prey, and if so, the very presence of the viewer,
the one wondering if it is asesthetic or not is the answer to the
question.  The viewer and the piece make a pair, and if they stick
together that is a clue to is it beautiful.

That also got me to thinking about evolutionary cooperation and
groups.  The immediate practical context of the question is that you
are judging entries in an art competition for a festival.  The
answer to the aesthetics question is then in some ways, what will
grow the festival?  What will attract, provoke, cause to interact,
and cause to return a critically necessary number (or type?) of
people to allow the festival to continue?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #170 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sat 12 Jan 19 07:57

    
Finally (and then I'll stop posting), there's also this from the
professor's opening:

>>Generative design is the activity of authoring the systems of
rules that generate parametric objects. Sometimes
designer-developers create a tool that generates forms, and then
give that tool to a user; other times, the designer-developer is the
sole intended user of her own tool.

That got me to thinking that this is all a special case of the whole
problem/challenge Stewart Brand <sbb>, articulated with his famous
quote, "We are as gods and may as well get good at it."  

A decade or so ago he updated it to "New situation, new motto.  We
are as gods and *have* to get good at it."

I'd suggest that there is something in the provocation and vision of
the first quote, and the New Dark urgency of the second quote that
parallels the progression of these annual conversations referenced
in <146>

>I'm very interested in the swing to "New Dark" by Bruce, and all
the talk of the Dark Mountain Project and Ivan Illich, especially in
a discussion led by the very founders of the Viridian Design
Movement. (For what it's worth, I think these are all important
sides of the environmentalist movement.)

And my guess as to why it's your instinct Bruce to poke so intently
at what might appear to be odd irrelevant things in the face of
unanswered Big Questions is an awareness that somewhere down there
in the details are clues to god-behavior.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #171 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 12 Jan 19 09:22

    
That question of judging which piece is better than another has been
in the past a stumbling block for me with weighing certain kinds of
experimental visual art and/or words. If I can't make such a
judgment at all, I tend to turn away from the work.

There are times I can tell something's really *good* without
understanding what it's doing, or its principles of generation and
choice. Then the next question becomes, for me, an old-fashioned
humanist one: "Is it memorable? Will I want to return to it?" If the
answer is no, it's still good, but probably not what I'll choose for
a prize, unless nothing is better. 

The very theme of your festival this year goes straight to that area
of old-fashioned human meaning: "Ghosts" is resonant because it
evokes what haunts us, and what will not vanish even when it's
supposed to. To call something, anything, a ghost is to give it some
part of that augmented meaning, quiddity, exigency, before it's even
out of the gate. 

Titles, conceptual frames make an enormous difference. I look up at
anything in this room, try framing it as "ghost," and it takes on a
new resonance and depth. Mortality-awareness, time-transcending,
mystery, do that.

Good luck with the judging. You're quite right to be aware of how
much it changes lives to be chosen (or not).
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #172 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 12 Jan 19 10:06

    
wrt the art in #166, my response to some of it  is 'perfectly fine
entry in the modernist genre of the last 100 yrs'. and some of it =
'meh'.

but does my neoclassicist human response matter? who is the art
-for-?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #173 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Sat 12 Jan 19 19:57

    

> they?re a consolation of some kind.

that's a lovely description of desk toys, bruce, and a lovely description
of most machine-generated art i've happened upon.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #174 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Sat 12 Jan 19 19:58

    

keta, i like your suggestion of an aesthetic-ethical matrix via biomimicry.
it seems strange, though, that we mimic something we appear to be dead-set
on destroying. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #175 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:45

    
“Bruce I’d be very interested in any thoughts you might have about
posts 84 and 85.”

*Well, it’s pleasant to address those issues of enhanced human
capability, ubermenschen, and, basically, “having to get good about
being as gods because we seem to lack alternatives.”

As it happens, last year, I was teaching on this subject.  I was a
class advisor for an Art Center College of Design course on
“Posthumanism.”  Art Center College of Design (from Pasadena, CA)
are my favorite design school, my design alma mater really, and the
ones who first gave me my cherished title of “Visionary in
Residence.”

So I dropped by Berlin a few times to lecture with Art Center.  And
I did some offshored video consultations with the teams of students
as they worked on their portfolios.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #176 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:45

    

Of course this was a futuristic “design fiction” effort.  I’ve been
writing science fiction about “posthumans” for most of my career,
but design fiction works best when it’s got some sharply defined
design constraints.  It’s that struggle with the grain of the
material that makes it into “design.”

So this “posthuman” design class was divided into three
posthuman-technology groups: the genetics group, the AI/robotics
group, and the neural-intelligence group, as in the famous Bill Joy
categories of contemporary technologies that might make humanity
obsolete.  (We left out “Nanotechnology” since nano has currently
gone out of style as a threat to human existence.)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #177 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:46

    
The design-fiction venue was Berlin, fifteen years in the future,
the year 02033.  The scheme was to create imaginary Berlin start-up
companies who had latched on to some specific aspect of a
“posthuman” technology, and were trying to mainstream it in Europe. 


So these were small, newfangled European companies (or nonprofit
groups) of 02033, who clearly needed some design services.  Besides
their imaginary “posthuman” hardware and services, they needed
branding, a logo, a typeface, a market strategy, a killer app,  an
elevator pitch, a convincing promotional video to demo the most
attractive features of their businesses: the skills they want to
teach you in design school, in other words.

And, especially, those imaginary enterprises had to be in Berlin and
of Berlin: a specific neighborhood, a park, a real, existent street.
So the students (mostly Americans) had to leave the Google searches
and the Photoshop and mix it up in the cityscape — they had to
Berlin-ify their design-fiction portfolio, and then demonstrate that
to a live audience of actual, skeptical Germans.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #178 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:47

    

I think this constraint helped a lot.  To say “we are as gods and
have to get good at it,” is quite a cool, visionary thing to say,
but to say “We are as Berlin gods, and we have to make a go of that
right here in the goth-kid quarter of Charlottenberg,” well, that
wakes people up to some of the consequences of such a declaration.

I wouldn’t claim that the end-products of this class were great
design fictions.  Those students are apprentice designers who
travelled to Berlin to learn their craft, and design-fiction is
quite hard to do well; it’s rather rhetorically delicate, and we
can’t all be sophisticated global mavens of speculative design, like
Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby.  

However, some ideas emerged from this course that  might be of
general interest.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #179 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:48

    

First, we never asked the students to do “ethical design” — we just
asked them to mimic genuine European start-up people. But then we
debated which of the proposed programs was the most ethically
sinister.  Which had the most abuse potential?

  Everyone agreed that it was the most public-spirited one, which
was based in compassion and wanted to help people “be their best.” 
It was using Facebook-style biometric monitoring to “improve”
people’s emotional states, and, by the nature of their pitch, you
just knew these tender-hearted service providers were gonna make
Facebook tons of money.

   The best-designed one was done by a dark-side hacker group of
“grinders,” who were up to all kinds of DNA mischief with
implantable human flesh.  Everybody knows what gooey Black-Mirror
postcyberpunk stuff is supposed to look like nowadays, so even the
Germans nodded in knowing agreement: ja, that’s some dystopian
futurism, all right.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #180 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 13 Jan 19 01:48

    

    The most interesting one was an out-of-control neural net
implanted in a German urban gardening machine. The idea of the
“machine in the garden” is pretty standard, but the key idea here
was that this ultra-advanced robot had an Alpha-Zero style
“understanding” of ecology that no human being could ever match.  It
was half-mystical AI computer that was much “closer to nature” than
any human being could ever become.  And the humans who supported it
(who were stricken with German Green guilt because of environmental
crises) had sort of *given up;* they had deputized their love of
nature to this bizarre, all-knowing device; they kinda followed it
around worshipfully like it was the Great God Pan.

    I’d never heard of such a notion.  It felt a bit
nextnature-dot-org — they’re very Dutch, at “Next Nature” — but it
was a truly original and strange idea. It’s the kind of speculative
idea that you can’t cook up alone in a room, with screens, and books
— instead, you simply must go out and look around at the state of
the world. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #181 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Sun 13 Jan 19 09:18

    

the great garden machine Pan sounds interesting indeed. i like how it
acknowledges the despair of many environmentalists. 

i just realized that a previous post didn't, somehow, get posted. so this
is an email fron a friend of mine in the trenches of AI, who used to work 
at The Well with me (and in fact coded my first web page for me, because
overuse of computers destroyed my tendons and i was forced off the job and
onto workers' comp). 

it's <pighed>, a.k.a. Mark Meadows. 

1) AI. While it will displace jobs (47% in the US before 2023), it will
undermine our ability to manage our decisions, and it is an emerging form
of government, people - the general public - are not paying attention to
the impacts it will have. China aside, we can look to the US for weak
signals of what is to come.  We are being led, ignorantly, by the largest
systems on the planet (Facebook and Google's AI systems such as Targeted
advertising (â€œTorchâ€) Textual analysis (â€œDeepTextâ€) Facial analysis
(â€œDeepFaceâ€) - systems that know how we feel, can change the way we feel,
and are motivated by selling our data to advertisers and others. 

Amazon,
for example, which has multiple class-action lawsuits for invasion of
privacy has now distributed a device that is always listening (research the
Sue Creek processor, made by Intel), is always measuring our affect, or
emotions, and is there to simultaneously monitor and steer our core family
decisions. As over 100M Americans buy Alexa for $30 they seemingly don't
question why someone would basically give them a multi-million dollar AI
system to put in their home. Someone that is one of the largest retailers
on the planet.

for question #2, i asked, " What is tugging most strongly at your own
private *heart* right now?" here's his answer:

2) Large financial markets disturb me. Having children, I'm raising them to
live a life entirely off-the-grid, with a hackers' and makers' ethos. This
independence of off-the-grid is a sad choice for me because, in opposition
to my American upbringing, independance is not a desirable trait. 

In my
travels over the last 3 decades, spanning over a hundred countries, I've
learned that independance generates traffic jams, competition, waste, and
ignorance. I prefer Marxist ideals of earning and socialist ideals of
contribution and, ultimately, the more we can depend on one another the
better off we are as a species. But I am raising my children with a strong
eye towards independance as I am unclear if it is even possible to trust
governments, companies, and collections of people with financial ties.

Climate change is only one of a number of indicators that public cost is
funding private profit and I don't want my children to be a part of systems
that work like that. These inequalities indicate that capitalism a racket
and now, as a global citizen I question my family's role in financial
markets. Having companies in multiple countries, I'm lucky to have the
flexibility to align my family with a more global view.  But it is
unquieting and I hope for a better future, globally, for all of us.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #182 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 13 Jan 19 17:09

    
art + climate change: center for study of force majeure, uc-santa
cruz

http://www.centerforforcemajeure.org/#introduction
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #183 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 14 Jan 19 06:15

    
T, it's great to hear from our mutual friend <pighed>, thanks for
posting that. I don't share Mark's concern about Alexa. I have an
Amazon Echo sitting close by, and if Alexa is a multi-million dollar
AI system, she's proof that, even with piles of money, you can't buy
or build a smart robot. Alexa is as dumb as a post. She certainly
can't hold an intelligent conversation. She can't answer - and
usually can't understand - fairly basic inquiries. She can
occasionally find a web reference, on the rare occasions where she
understands the question. If Amazon is listening in on our
conversations, I'm not seeing the evidence. I can see past activity:
we asked about Mike Pence and the Mueller investigation, and she
responded with Wikipedia info on Michael Flynn. She couldn't respond
on the average duration of the Nutcracker ballet. She says she can
play podcasts, but she can't understand our podcast requests, so
that doesn't really work. When she makes a dumb response and we tell
her "that's funny," she can respond "Funny in a good way, I hope."
She doesn't know potential causes of hives. She does know the
temperature outside, but you don't need Alexa to tell which way the
wind blows.

Question: Who inducted the music group U2 into the Rock and Roll
Hall of Fame? Answer: "English guitarist, singer, and songwriter
Eric Clapton is the only three-time inductee to the Rock and Roll
Hall of Fame."

She can play Spotify if I carefully articulate the name of the
artist I want to hear. She can connect you to a dumb conversation
with one of the Alexa prize socialbots. If I ask her to tell me a
story, she tells me that's a book by Lisa Suhay
(https://books.google.com/books/about/Tell_Me_a_Story.html?id=qtrWAAAAMAAJ&sour
ce=kp_book_description).

I haven't seen a single instance where Amazon has offered products
based on something overheard on Echo, though I might have missed it.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #184 of 231: Jake Dunagan (jdunagan) Mon 14 Jan 19 09:29

    
The Great God Panarchy
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #185 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 14 Jan 19 10:39

    
This is the reaction of Jean-Paul Sartre when he visits an artist's
studio in 1947 and there's a weird network of things moving around
in there.


http://www.artnews.com/2017/06/30/from-the-archives-jean-paul-sartre-on-alexan
der-calder-in-1947/
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #186 of 231: Via email from gmoke (jonl) Mon 14 Jan 19 14:00

    
There’s more that one state of the world.  There are many states of
the world and, if I heard Bruce Sterling right, there are also many
futures and no future at all because the only time we really have is
now.  We make the future right now.

With that in mind, I’d like to say that about two or three days of
the amount we spend on the military globally would buy the billion
poorest people in the world a solar light and phone charger at the
current retail cost of $10 per unit.  Of course, it would probably
be better to put together some kind of local business system such as
Grameen Energy in Bangladesh that serves as an economic platform
rather than noblesse oblige charity but it’s technically and
economically feasible right now to eliminate deep energy poverty
completely all around the world.  A solar light and charger is also
a solar civil defense and, perhaps, a way to a solar swadeshi for a
renewably powered nonviolent or Gandhian economy.

But that’s another story probably for the time when eco-restoration
villages and towns become more prevalent.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #187 of 231: Via email from Shebar Windstone (jonl) Mon 14 Jan 19 14:01

    
12 years left (if we're lucky) to pull the planet away from the
frying pan -- i.e., to prevent global warming from going above
1.5°C/2.7°F.
We have 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe, warns UN
(Guardian)
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2018/oct/08/global-warming-must-not-ex
ceed-15c-warns-landmark-un-report

Global Warming of 1.5 ºC (IPCC)
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/

The Earth is in a death spiral. It will take radical action to save
us (George Monbiot)
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/nov/14/earth-death-spiral-radic
al-action-climate-breakdown
more by Monbiot:  https://www.monbiot.com/

Global warming of oceans equivalent to an atomic bomb per second
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/jan/07/global-warming-of-oceans-e
quivalent-to-an-atomic-bomb-per-second
Could participants (& lurkers) in this year's discussion share your
thoughts about what we might do -- & inspire, organize or pressure
others to do -- to give priority to long-term survival & well-being
for all living beings rather than short-term profits & expediency
for a minority of profligate humans? (or however you might define
trying to avert climate cataclysm)

Trump's shutdown might be a preliminary solution, if it could be
expanded to the whole country & our military forces around the
world, since the US military is the world's largest single energy
consumer & the USA (vying with China) is the largest national
consumer of goods & producer of waste. But might there be more
rational & humane methods to end the international ransacking,
pillaging & plundering of Earth & its inhabitants?

Here's a song that comes to mind (sorry, Bruce, it's not techno):
Ferron:  It Won't Take Long
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kyxNBSdDHKA
(from Shadows on a Dime, 1984)
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #188 of 231: Via email from Steve Levinson (jonl) Mon 14 Jan 19 14:03

    
Re: James' comment

31 of 182 Bridle:
"..If we acknowledge it as deliberate, we also empower ourselves to
counter it in meaningful and progressive ways - not going back to
the cave, and certainly not to Vipassana retreats in Myanmar, but by
reconstructing technologies that support rather than degrade
attention and thinking. "

Why do you dismiss out of hand the ancient technology of Vipassana
as something useful that can support attention and thinking?  For me
it would be a great prescription for all who are strongly feeling
the chaotic whirlpool the world has become.

And yes I understand and strongly appreciate your point that it is
not just chaos at work but real malevolent powers doing the
swirling. 

Yet the idea of seeking out some deep quiet of the mind
(however you want to do it, I don't keep up with Vipassana but have
other practice) is a wonderful way to reduce worldly anxiety by
practicing the de-energizing of the minds' loops of fear and
uncertainty.  
  
One good thing about those structured retreats that is interestingly
opposite to this conversation (that constant need to communicate
when in the same room, here the infinite digital room, so infinite
need) is the practice of being with people in an actual room in
silence.  More challenging and rewarding perhaps than being with
oneself in silence.  How hard it is to not talk!

Isn't some  practice of silence something desperately needed right
now in this New Dark Age?

Also perhaps the idea of focusing on releasing thoughts rather than
gathering them seems inimical to cultivating reasoned thinking, but
in practice it opens pathways to clearer and creative thinking.  
Of course I wouldn't really want to go all the way the Myanmar to do
this, too much baggage to deal with being steeped into a traditional
culture, and perhaps that was the thrust of your comment.
So to sum up: mindfulness good, fatalism bad.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #189 of 231: Via email from Giorgos Georgiadis (jonl) Mon 14 Jan 19 14:05

    
Before this SOTW wraps up, something that keeps bugging me, while
otherwise thoroughly enjoying this excellent discussion/pinball
game: can we find a better name for 'climate crisis'?

I noted 'climate disruption' and 'climate change' as suggested
alternatives in previous posts, but are they really? Both disruption
and crisis imply a transition but focus on the transition itself,
not the day after. Change implies a future steady state of sorts,
but it's way too benign to my taste. Can we not start calling it
'New Climate' or something?

As a member of the greek neo-diaspora, I have a special beef with
the word 'crisis': speaking of Greece as a future lab/paradigm, I
see a lot of people today seemingly confused whether the crisis
actually finished and when. Somehow they kept thinking that
afterwards they will end up in the world as they left it before
entering the 'crisis'. Or worse, they keep thinking they are still
inside it, refusing to see this as the new normal.

I know the discussion moved on to things like art, AI and so on, but
spare a thought on the people trapped in the transition.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #190 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 15 Jan 19 01:30

    <scribbled by bruces Tue 15 Jan 19 01:35>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #191 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 15 Jan 19 01:38

    
Well, if you’ve got a “crisis” that goes on for centuries, then
“dark age” is a pretty good coinage.  I mean, it’s an age, and
things are dark.  Where’s the problem?

It’s mid-January, and I’m getting writing assignments and people
asking me to travel.  It looks like 2019 is turning into another
year of my lifetime.  Maybe rather standard, and not so shatteringly
diistinct from the many other ones.  

I can remember certain energy-crisis and impeachment episodes in the
“No Future” 1970s, when it felt like the wheels were coming right
off civilization.  They didn’t, though.   It felt like they oughta,
for any number of good reasons, but if you caught those cues and
scrammed for your fallout-shelter in the hills during the 1970s, to
raise goats and grow your own cabbages, it didn’t take all that long
to come sheepishly tip-toeing back.

Imagine if The Donald had taken office and then immediately declared
a Climate Crisis State of Emergency.  He would have had all the
facts at his back, but I can only imagine the weird political and
economic mayhem that guy would have wreaked. He might still do that
— just, tear up everything he said before, and launch a whole new
set of lies.  All it would take would be a hurricane through some of
his favorite properties.

Would his fans get all upset about his intellectual inconsistency,
or would they just applaud him and say they'd been all-for-it all
along?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #192 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 15 Jan 19 06:40

    
Sorry folks for being MIA - felled by a bug.

You have a point Bruce - awareness of how this is an "age" is
important.  Besides "Dark Age," we have in that direction also
"Anthropocene."  "Force majeure," as <loris> points to in <182> is
pretty interesting and provocative too.

I would take issue though with your logic that because the world
didn't end in the 1970's, it won't end this time either.  It's very
true that the world doesn't end.  Michael Meade even has a book
called "Why the World Doesn't End" - the reason is that stories of
endings are ways to seed, gestate and germinate stories of
beginnings.  That's a very important point in itself, that there is
legitimate reason for catastrophe stories in times when change is
called for.

But.

But tipping points.  The links at the top of Shebar Windstone's
<187> have to do with systems perturbed to the point of irreversible
state changes.  It's not endless speculation about an
ever-retreating singularity, it's fairly precise awareness of a
unique physical moment - it's frogs sitting in the pot who've not
only figured out they are on their way to boiling, but also how
they're stoking their own fire and pretty likely when the roiling
bubbles start.  Maybe the best candidate in the field for a better
name for "climate change" or "climate crisis" is "350.org."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #193 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky, acknowledging the Bizarro-world elephant in the room... (jonl) Tue 15 Jan 19 07:06

    
Mad King Donald's Bizarro world reign may finally be imperiled, and
it's about time. 

That term "Bizarro world" has a specific meaning - see
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bizarro_World: "a situation or setting
which is weirdly inverted or opposite to expectations." That's the
best characterization of the world Trump's created: he's rejected
all established political wisdom and common sense, asserting his
fevered will as absolute authority... asserting that the world is
broken and "only I can fix it."  With the help of Mitch McConnell,
Saruman to Trump's Sauron, the regime has brought the US government
to its knees, rejected US allies and embraced enemies, launched
attacks on the most respected institutions, sown chaos far and wide.

His kind of crazy can only persist so long before reality catches up
- but it's impressive and a bit disconcerting how long he's got away
with his wild bull in the china shop routine. Is he a Russian agent?
If you'd written a "president as Manchurian candidate" science
fiction novel describing such a thing, how different would it be
from our political reality of the last two years? However in a
novel, would any author have expected such a figure to get this far
with a blatant and persistent attack on "truth, justice, and the
American way"?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #194 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 15 Jan 19 07:34

    
I wasn't at all part of the camp that felt throwing a wrench in the
machinery might be a good thing before the election, but now things
are very interesting.  The purpose of satire is to make one aware of
previously invisible assumptions, and boy has Trump succeeded at
that.  We are a nation of the rule of law.  Who knew?!  And on and
on.

If not for Trump, would we have Ocasio-Cortez?  Would we have an
activated citizenry?  If not for the Access Hollywood tape, would we
have had the largest single day of action in human history - the
first Women's March?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #195 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 15 Jan 19 07:36

    
<jonl> slipped, so moved what else I was about to say to a separate
post:

Thanks Steve Levinson for your appeal for the merits of quiet.  I
know this isn't all you're saying, but I personally believe that how
you listen, when and how you choose to be quiet, what tools you use
to cultivate calm are crucially important.  Between stimulus and
response always lies the power to choose.  My personal
corrolary/response to the "We are as gods..." perspective is "we are
as humans and have to get deep at it."


And if I'm not mistaken, isn't it the case that the Dark Mountain
folks started out with the premise to stop talking and start
listening - to the voices in the powerful uncivilized forces around
them.  They weren't "back to the land"; they were: 

>Our art will begin with the attempt to step outside the human
bubble. By careful attention, we will reengage with the non-human
world.

Dark Mountain Manifesto <https://dark-mountain.net/about/manifesto/>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #196 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 15 Jan 19 10:38

    
>I know the discussion moved on to things like art, AI and so on,
but spare a thought on the people trapped in the transition.

Risking multiple posts again, there is one other thing that has been
bothering me for days.  Somebody up there made the claim, "the best
parties happen in squats."  I don't doubt that's true.  But here's a
story from 2018.

I was at the Whole Earth 50 after reception in October talking to a
young journalist and Carolyn Garcia (Mountain Girl).  We were
talking about a story MG had told earlier in the evening about how a
Kesey prank gone wrong (police came to the party!) had figured in
the origin story of the Whole Earth Catalog.  Now, to the two of us,
she talked about a completely different side of the experience - not
the fun side but the hard side.  That event triggered Kesey's flight
to Mexico, and a cascade of hard times.

The conversation moved on to other things, and MG began talking
about something she is working on now - a writers' residency program
at the Kesey family farm (<https://keseyfarm.com/summerresidency/>)

As I was standing there listening to this calm, composed, practical
woman in her 70s, partner to both Ken Kesey and Jerry Garcia, who
are famously both no longer with us, I was thinking about what
support the blazing stars always find and need and take for granted.

And I think that's relevant here, because when the whole world is
filled with blazing stars lighting the transition, decades on, it
will be the trapped piece-picker-uppers who are still here tending
to the next generation.

Even when we call ourselves candle-tenders in the new dark, this
will still be true.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #197 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 15 Jan 19 11:08

    
For your point above about the language we use to refer to the
current situation, I would like to understand more the objection to
the word 'crisis.' 

I use "climate crisis" at times, but tend to say most often "the
crisis of the biosphere," which feels apt to me, given the numbers
of vanishing species and amount of vanishing habitat in the past 40
years, as well as the way that the stratospheric readings of
increased CO2 in air are playing out in the planet's living beings.

Meanwhile, candle-tenders is a lovely phrase, keta. We aren't the
candles, we are their tenders of something fragile, flickering, and
light-bringing, of which we are only in part the makers.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #198 of 231: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 15 Jan 19 11:15

    
reminds me of hanging out with my lefty utopian friends, brimming
with great schemes back in the 60s and 70s --- and my always
thinking 'oh yeah? who tends to the garbage?"
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #199 of 231: Via email from gmoke (jonl) Tue 15 Jan 19 14:35

    
Pan is the only Greek god known to have died:  
"According to the Greek historian Plutarch (in De defectu
oraculorum, 'The Obsolescence of Oracles'), Pan is the only Greek
god (other than Asclepius) who actually dies. During the reign of
Tiberius (14–37 CE), the news of Pan's death came to one Thamus, a
sailor on his way to Italy by way of the island of Paxi."

Asclepius was a mortal before he became a god, if I remember
correctly.

For what it’s worth —

1.
My approach to climate change is
100% renewables ASAP
zero emissions economy ASAP
carbon drawdown ASAP
geotherapy (not geoengineering) ASAP

Resources: http://drawdown.org
https://www.crcpress.com/Geotherapy-Innovative-Methods-of-Soil-Fertility-Resto
ration-Carbon-Sequestration/Goreau-Larson-Campe/p/book/9781466595392
http://bio4climate.org
http://soil4climate.org
http://solarray.blogspot.com

At least as a thought experiment.

Geotherapy is the use of existing ecological systems to repair the
damage homo sap sap (the sap) had done.  It is the next step in
biomimicry and Gaian ethics (or aesthetics, which sometime I think
is the same thing).


2.
I start from Solar IS Civil Defense, which is necessary NOW
in case of weather or other natural disaster, whatever you believe
about Climate Change or Sanity Clause.

10 bucks buys a solar light and charger today, just go Internet
shopping. That's a personal electric solar civil defense, the basics
of light, communications, and extra batteries. 10 bucks is also the
price of a hand-crank light and charger. Add a bicycle charger (or
electric bike) and you have "free" electricity for as long as the
batteries hold a charge and the chargers work.

More at http://solarray.blogspot.com/2018/09/personal-power-set.html

3.
Simple solar and energy efficiency can be taught, to those who want
to know, fairly easily and can be quite effective
A South-Facing Window Is Already a Solar Collector
https://youtu.be/FdGAdEq242M
Solar windowbox air heater
https://youtu.be/lTOe2OYSPlw
Insulating Roller Shade
https://youtu.be/jEh9Bq4qQB8

Six pack of solar
https://youtu.be/KTLBsxI-Xl8
Recycled solar
https://youtu.be/KTLBsxI-Xl8

I used to do workshops on simple solar and broke one down into a
series of short videos:
Part 1 at https://youtu.be/IdPftGMNbEA
the others are available at
https://www.youtube.com/user/gmoke/videos


4.
Simple solar can become an economic lever and non-violent economic
practice, a technological adaptation of Gandhi's concept of
swadeshi, local production, what he called the heart of satyagraha.
I imagine a solar swadeshi
(http://solarray.blogspot.com/2005/05/solar-swadeshi-hand-made-electricity.html
) that becomes a solar walkaway or an electrical grid boycott to add a little impetus to the growing tide of Extinction Rebellion (anybody else see a resemblance to the Trainites of John Brunner's Sheep Look Up?) and the Sunrise Movement.


5.  Since scientists tell us that we have about a decade to do
something to reduce climate calamity, somebody should be scheduling
out the next 10 years, 3,650 days, for climate action, month by
month, week by week, day by day to do what is ecologically necessary
to restore the atmosphere to preindustrial levels of CO2 (270 parts
per million) ASAP.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #200 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 15 Jan 19 14:52

    
Today is the last day of the "official" two week slot for the State
of the World conversation, though WELL members who want to continue
hanging out and posting here are welcome. Meanwhile our thanks to
all participants, especially the ringleaders (Bruce and I, Tiffany
Lee Brown, James Bridle, and Jake Dunagan).

Re gmoke's post - which uses the label "climate calamity" - I wonder
if we really have ten years. I've been saying it's too late to fix
the problem, and I'm usually considered an optimist. 

Here's new thinking about the dark:
https://www.vox.com/2018/12/27/18137571/what-is-hopepunk-noblebright-grimdark

Hopepunk is "the opposite of grimdark" ... "as much a mood and a
spirit as a definable literary movement, a narrative message of
'keep fighting, no matter what.'"

I can get behind this movement.

"The aesthetic of hopepunk can be seen as part of a broader cultural
embrace of 'softness,' wholesomeness, and gentleness. We see this in
a growing emphasis on what might be thought of as an extreme, even
aggressive form of self-care and wellness in response to stress
created by bleak sociopolitical times. Embedded into this idea are
trends like the high-end sleep industry; the popular home and
lifestyle trend hygge, which emphasizes comfort and coziness; the
rom-com resurgence; the ever-growing popularity of kawaii, or 'cute'
culture; 'JOMO,' a.k.a. the joy of missing out; and the online shift
away from cynicism to wholesome memes."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #201 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 15 Jan 19 14:58

    
I was a fan of the Netflix series Sense8, presented in that article
as an example of the HopePunk aesthetic.
https://www.netflix.com/title/80025744

"In describing the recent finale of what is perhaps the most
hopepunk TV series to emerge in recent years, Sense8, Vox critic at
large Todd VanDerWerff noted that the show is 'endlessly empathetic,
endlessly generous,' and an 'expression of radical empathy,' before
pinpointing that Sense8’s 'audacious' story — which earned a mixed
critical reception — walks hand-in-hand with its unending optimism.
'The final sequence leaves viewers with the idea that love might
save the world,' VanDerWerff wrote. 'Is that beautiful or naive?'

"In the framework of hopepunk, it’s neither. 'Hopepunk is a radical
call to arms for us to imagine better,' Slack said. 'To embrace the
fact that fantasy is not simply an escape from the world but an
invitation to go deeper into it. That we must fall in love with the
world that we so deeply wish to change.' Instead, he argues that
love may be beautiful, but it’s also messy and painful, and far from
being naive, it’s a conscious, hard-won and fully self-aware
choice."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #202 of 231: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 15 Jan 19 18:45

    
Thank you, gmoke, for your clear & encouraging actions.

Thank you jon, all the ringleader voices especially, and all, for a
chance to start the year with a broadened thinking, once again,
about what matters, what's interesting, what is, and what may be.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #203 of 231: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 15 Jan 19 21:46

    

thank you, everyone, for a truly interesting conversation.

jon, thank you so much for bringing up climate insanity (how's that for a
new phrase?) before we all clocked out. it is the elephant in every room.

here is my little formula for attempting to save the world:

1. Stop feeding the Outrage Machine. 
   I have also attempted to stop being fed *by* the Outrage Machine. 
   Participation in Facebook and other amoral, nonhuman, algorithm-driven,
   surveillance economy systems that cajole and control mass behavior 
   from the safety of impenetrable 'black boxes' feeds the machine, 
   and draws us to attach our mouths to its teats, over and over, in 
   place of sleeping, in place of attaching our real mouths to those
   of our lovers or their secret places, in place of tilling soil, in
   place of having a laugh with a friend or playing a game with our kids.
   
   Turn off Rachael Maddow. Spend at least one day every week 
   away from digital and analogue media that force your mind to its
   angry, despairing surface moment after moment (that means all the news,
   but also put aside those big think pieces, current magazines, and books
   about the State of the World). Keep in mind that the Trumps and 
   Breitbarts of this globe are far, far better than you and your 
   compatriots at using Outrage to advantage. The more you feed this
   machine and allow yourself to be fed its unholy Scooby Snax of endless
   terror, fear, and self-righteousness, the more powerful the machine
   becomes. (By the way, I'm not brilliant at all this, but I'm a hell of
   a lot better at it than I was in November 2016, when my explorations
   began in earnest.) Every day that your Facebook or Instagram account
   exists is your endorsement of Trump, Cambridge Analytica, election
   interference, and a hopelessly polarized America. It doesn't matter
   that you, personally, are far too smart and compassionate and good and
   decent to use Facebook/etc in the wrong way; merely being there tells
   everyone around you, "Yep, you can't escape social media." But you 
   can. Just walk away, and see if you can find your own self floating
   somewhere nearby. Merge with that self and walk into the forest, 
   the desert, the sea.

2. Become Nature.
   You already are, after all, so why not immerse in what Nature is still
   here? Be with the trees that have not yet fallen or burned or been 
   hacked down to make way for cattle and asphalt. Grind your bare heels
   into difficult dirt. Smell the wind on your skin. Collapse in an
   unspectacular heap at the foot of a sheer, rock cliffside and weep. 
   
   Repeat, repeat, until you reconnect with your own pulsing planet, 
   until you realize the umbilical cord from you to Mother Earth was 
   never truly cut. You and yours and all the rest of us lie huddled
   at her breast. (Had to keep that weird teats metaphor going from a 
   couple grafs up.) Stop taking pictures of her and reading about her
   on your screen. Spend an hour actually in and among her and her 
   many creatures -- animal, vegetable, mineral, indescribable -- 
   for every hour you spend worrying, calling senators, and signing
   petitions about her. 

3. Be small.
   Your culture has told you that to be important is to be loud, to be
   heard, to be everywhere at once, to read everything on every subject,
   to lord knowledge and money and status over everything and everyone
   possible. That an ice shelf in Antarctica might melt into the sea
   before you, personally, have gotten to see it may seem unfair --
   but if you keep being big, all around the globe, you and your jet
   fuel will be hastening the ice shelf's doom. 

   Allow yourself to be dwarfed by the stars, the moon, the tall trees,
   the vast ocean. Then imagine all humanity. Be dwarfed by the inter-
   connected megacolony of which you are a part. See what happens when
   you stop resisting your relative insignificance, the short and
   perhaps unimportant span of your life here on Earth. 

   Find meaning, then, in your pinkie toe. In the neighbors you did not
   bother to get to know before. In all the wild places nearest you. In
   your local government. In the school near where you live, the school 
   bursting with young humans like great swarms of ants, those who will 
   inherit this world of AI chess players and rising seas. Mentor one.
   Teach a class full. Go to School Board meetings and demand that the
   school start using real plates and silverware that can be washed and
   reused, instead of disposable plastic ones. (I have not yet won that
   battle, here in my small town.) 

   Yes, the senator still deserves a call, the postcards should still 
   go in the mail, certain protests should be marched. I placed more 
   newspaper pieces, both journalism and political Op-Ed, in the last
   couple years while being "small" than I had in a very long time. 
   That is where hyper-local focus took me. And I can see, quite 
   directly and simply, the real effects my little, persistent actions
   are having. 

   Yes, it'shopelessTrumpwarRussiaArcticRefugegovernmentshutdownoutrage-
   oftheday,ofthemoment,ofthenanosecond. Yes, these things are enormous.
   No, you do not have to be shut down and torn up by them. Look around
   you. Take the soil under your feet in your bare hands and smear it on
   your face, your chest, your knobby knees. THIS is real. THIS is what
   you have to save, for yourself, for your sense of meaning in a crisis-
   driven, threatening time -- and for those who will follow you. Save
   one handful of dirt for the children. For my child, my son, who is
   now eight years old. 

4. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #204 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 16 Jan 19 00:31

    <scribbled by bruces Wed 16 Jan 19 00:31>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #205 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 16 Jan 19 00:33

    

*Yeah, I was also at that Whole Earth 50th thing, sandwiched between
Wavy Gravy and Mountain Girl, and and although Wavy’s pretty frail
now, I have to say that Mountain Girl cheered me up.  She’s quite
the indestructible Bohemian matriarch, full of sturdy gravitas. 
There’s something timeless about Carolyn Garcia: she was like Robert
Louis Stevenson’s Californian girlfriend, the indomitable soul who
pitches in when it looks like he’s coughing his lungs out and then
trucks right along to Samoa and world artistic fame: hey, long
strange trip, no big problem.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #206 of 231: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 16 Jan 19 00:35

    

*This is what the Whole Earth/WIRED/CoolTools electronicized scene
looks like when you’re not from around here.  

http://justinmcguirk.com/cool-tools-kevin-kelly


This cultural analysis may seem kinda condescending and maybe a
little British and snooty, but it’s nice that it grounds California
counterculture in a larger historical process.  As I said at the
Whole Earth 50th, you might well blame Henry Ford for a traffic jam,
but to blame Henry Ford for today’s self-driving cars is a category
error.  Tomorrow composts today.

There’s a melancholy in learning that your dreams and intentions get
packed down in the mulch of the passing years; that a crystalline
gesture loses its sharp edges; that historic fame turns famous
people into cartoon parodies of themselves.  

On the other hand, there really is a lot of mortal rubbish around
us, and the passage of years transforms that rubbish into a rich
vitality.  There’s always some fresh, naive, un-jaded guy coming
along.  He can stick a pitchfork into a stack of high-weirdness like
that, and holy cow, look out.

I gotta get to some typing now; I’ve got some deadlines, and, well,
happy to have the schedule, it's good to have marks on the calendar.
I’ll be back next year, with any luck.  So long for now.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #207 of 231: Tom Valovic (tvacorn) Wed 16 Jan 19 06:38

    

https://www.thenation.com/article/climate-change-fossil-fuel-capitalism-divorc
e/
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #208 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 16 Jan 19 07:06

    
So long Bruce, have a great year!  It really has been a good
conversation this time around.

T, I love your formula, especially #4.

Appropriate link, Tom.

Looking forward to closing thoughts others may have, as there are so
many interesting paths not fully taken in the posts above.

For me, I'd like to close with one last report from the composted
field.  While I've been sick over the last few days, I've been
reading a book called Native Pragmatism, by Scott L. Pratt.  As I've
said, I've been interested in all things indigenous this year, and
what this book does is look at the Native American roots in the
American pragmatic tradition.  Instead of taking the position that
American philosophy is a continuation of European thought upon
encountering the condition of "wilderness," and that new ideas are a
spontaneous result, explained by creativity and genius, Pratt argues
that, "American pragmatism begins along the border between Native
and European America as an attitude of resistance against the
dominant attitudes of European colonialism."

Why is that relevant here?  Because it is about trying to, "respond
to the problems faced by those who find themselves in a place where
radically different peoples meet and seek to coexist."

The four elements of this thread of resistance that he identifies
are commitments to interaction, pluralism, community and growth. 
(By growth, he doesn't mean "bigger and better;" he means more like,
"the purpose of life is to create conditions conducive to life."

Sound like any current national conversations?

What I want to close with though, is not any detail on his
arguments, but a quote from his introduction.  In it he mentions
those who have proposed similar things in the past, and brings up a
1952 essay called "Americanizing the White Man" by Felix S. Cohen. 
Cohen describes going to a meeting where the Commissioner on Indian
Affairs asked a group of Native people how the Bureau could best
"Americanize the Indian."  A Native American man in the audience
arose and replied this way:

"You will forgive me if I tell you that my people were Americans
thousands of years before your people were. The question is not how
you can Americanize us but how we can Americanize you.  We have been
working at that for a long time. Sometimes we are discouraged at the
results. But we will keep trying.

"And the first thing we want to teach you is that, in the American
way of life, each man has respect for his brother's vision. Because
each of us respected his brother's dream, we enjoyed freedom here in
America while your people were busy killing and enslaving each other
across the water. The relatives you left behind are still trying to
kill each other and enslave each other because they have not learned
that freedom is built on my respect for my brother's vision and his
respect for mine.

"We have a hard trail ahead of us in trying to Americanize you and
your white brothers. But we are not afraid of hard trails."
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #209 of 231: Via email from Giorgos Georgiadis (jonl) Wed 16 Jan 19 07:13

    
Thanks everyone for pitching in, I now have 'cataclysm' too, and of
course there no problem with any combination of 'new', 'dark' and
'age' Bruce. I think they give the right tone.

I love your story in particular keta, I see what you mean. It made
me think and it made me hopeful, and these are the best stories. If
this was a dharma battle, you would have won. (And how I would like
to see AlphaZero engaged in a dharma battle! AlphaZen anyone?)

'Crisis' as a word is very much alive and in daily use in the Greek
language: it means judgment, as in 'Judgment's Day' (no ominous
undertones there, no sir) but also as in 'use your judgement'.
Naturally it means also 'crisis' in the English sense, which I am to
understand got associated with through 'decision', as in 'tension
that is gradually being build up, leading to a decision point'.

To answer your question Jane, I guess my objection is 'can we still
talk about a crisis if there is no decision point?' At what point do
we stop waiting for it? How do we help people understand and perhaps
do something? Any one thing of the topics discussed here, really -
go Dark Mountain, go German Greens, go light/notice/tend to the
candles in our New Dark, ... 

Love all of those choices btw, and I understand inaction too (not
being inaction at all some times - just life), but I'm not sure it's
going to be enough this time around. I am with Paul Virilio on this,
when he says (in his "Administration of Fear") that besides the
atomic bomb, in the 21st we got ourselves an ecological bomb as well
as an informational one. Tall order, with or without our leftover
roman infrastructure. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #210 of 231: John Spears (banjojohn) Sun 27 Jan 19 11:05

    
The Nolichucky River, in East Tennessee, is polluted with enriched
uranium, plutonium, and thallium. In the long run, will reducing CO2
solve anything meaningful when our air, soil and water are still
contaminated with such poisons?

Yes, we need to clean up the destruction made by modern man, but
reducing CO2 is just one factor. Why does it get so much of the
spotlight? Doesn't focusing on CO2 take away awareness on other
forms of pollution, ones that will take thousands, if not millions
of years to be resolved? 

I'm not advocating for CO2, or minimizing it's threat. I'm just
pointing out that modern man has produced a multitude of
environmental threats to life on earth, yet CO2 gets the bulk of
this press. Could this be misdirection?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #211 of 231: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 27 Jan 19 11:08

    
CO2 is a global existential threat. It's not wrong to give it
particular emphasis.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #212 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 29 Jan 19 09:05

    
Because tipping points, sadly.  When you are dealing with a set of
interrelated processes and feedback loops, there can come times when
gradual changes to values become essentially irreversable shifts to
a different state or condition - hence existential threat.

Yes, the radioactivity spreading via the Nolichucky will gradually
poison a larger and larger area for a profoundly long time, which is
truly dangerous and important.  And yes, cleaning up the
contamination sources sooner rather than later will make the problem
smaller rather than bigger.

But with climate change we can identify very near term tipping
points where gradual becomes catastrophically different.  Someone
mentioned the "game over methane burp" during the conversation -
this is an example.  

It's fairly easy to see that if the conditions for ice cap melting
persist, eventually you will melt all the ice, and to suspect that
you will no longer have the conditions available whereby ice could
begin to re-accumulate.  But we now also know that vast amounts of
methane (the shorter-term but faster-acting greenhouse gas) are kept
out of the atmosphere because they are frozen into the tundra or
kept too cool to release in undersea areas.  When the permafrost
melts enough, or when the ocean temperature increases enough in
certain areas, the methane releases and enters the atmosphere.  This
is a process that we recognize we have no known capability to modify
or reverse, and it begins long before the time when all the ice
melts.  In fact it is beginning in some areas now.

Going back to the radioactive release example, say there is a giant
rusting tank of water at the radioactive source.  The difference
between preventing the tank from bursting and gathering back up all
the spilled water from the ends of the earth after it does burst is
the difference we are talking about.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #213 of 231: John Spears (banjojohn) Wed 30 Jan 19 09:48

    
By existential threat, I'm guessing you mean "human" existence?

Life has existed on Earth for 4 billion years, through all kinds of
conditions. CO2 has fluctuated on a cyclic basis. CO2 isn't toxic;
in fact, it's basic to life on earth. Plants break it down. 

As a mind exercise, consider what would happen to life on earth if
humans disappeared tomorrow. Which would be the greater threat to
all remaining life on earth, CO2 or the toxic and radioactive
pollutants created by man? Eventually the man made CO2 would
decrease, but the bio-persistent creations like Uranium 238 and C8
would be poisoning life for thousands of years. C8, a chemical used
to make Scotchguard and Teflon, is now ubiquitous in the human blood
stream. It's not breaking down any time soon. 

Count me as someone whose loyalty is first to life on earth, and not
the human race. The human race will pass. That's a given.
Geologically speaking, we've been here a minute, and probably only
have only a few seconds left. 

If the human race won't face the fact that we've poisoned the planet
out of greed, then we don't deserve to exist.   



 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #214 of 231: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 30 Jan 19 11:19

    
> CO2 isn't toxic

Try living in an atmosphere that's 2% CO2.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #215 of 231: Alan Fletcher (af) Wed 30 Jan 19 11:32

    
Had to look that up.  I thought it was asphyxiation only.

At low levels it's safe .. up to 1,000 ppm
At intermediate levels you can get CO2 intoxication or poisoning
5000 ppm is the max permissible workspace exposure
At very high levels asphyxiation gets you: > 40,000 ppm (4%?)


<https://www.thoughtco.com/causes-of-carbon-dioxide-poisoning-606390>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #216 of 231: Alan Fletcher (af) Wed 30 Jan 19 11:33

    
Levels :
<https://ohsonline.com/Articles/2016/04/01/Carbon-Dioxide-Detection-and-Indoor-
Air-Quality-Control.aspx>
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #217 of 231: John Spears (banjojohn) Wed 30 Jan 19 14:32

    
As for clean up of radioactive waste, I suggest watching Atomic
Homefront. We can't even clean up our very first atomic weapons
waste. 

We aren't anywhere close to toxic CO2 levels.

As humans, we face many existential threats. For some reason, CO2 is
the only one anybody gets worked up over. That strikes me as normal
human hubris: we usually don't see what hits us, but we think we
can. Isn't the heart of the man made CO2 problem the vicious cycle
of modernity and overpopulation? Can you imagine 8 billion people,
all owning cars, computers, house with central heat, air
conditioning and fridges? Because, how can we have that, and not
have CO2? Where do we draw the line, and say, no, you can't have
what these other people have?

 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #218 of 231: John Spears (banjojohn) Thu 31 Jan 19 09:18

    
Interesting BBC story out today. 

<https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-47063973>

Wouldn't the corollary indicate that the contemporary destruction of
the rain forest should be a major cause of the modern increase in
CO2. If such a small increase in vegetation could have a global
effect on climate in the 15th to 18th century, then it seems logical
that the first step in stemming and reversing CO2 increases would be
protecting and even expanding the rain forest.

While the US seems poised on invading Venezuela for oil, shouldn't
we be invading Brazil in order to restore the rain forest? 

 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #219 of 231: Andrew Alden (alden) Thu 31 Jan 19 11:31

    
Easier simply to vacate our own prairies and the Appalachians.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #220 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Fri 1 Feb 19 07:42

    
Very good points in <213>, and I do understand what you mean by the
relatively greater importance of bio-persistent creations in the
long run.

Also though, no, I don't mean human existence for the existential
threat.  I mean much closer to all remaining life on earth, and the
threat comes not from the CO2 itself, but from the disruption of
relationships that cause ecosystem collapses.  Humans will be here
in 50 or 100 years (wandering around is some stunned fashion), but
will coral?

That BBC story is very interesting.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #221 of 231: (fom) Sat 25 May 19 20:05

    
alden, say more about that?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #222 of 231: Andrew Alden (alden) Sun 26 May 19 13:43

    
People persistently focus on trees, when the far greater repository of
carbon is in the soil. The Appalachians are marginal land for anything but
forestry, so, better to leave the soil there alone. Much of the Great Plains
is unsustainable for agriculture (see Ogallala aquifer, depletion of) and
should be encouraged to return to mature prairie.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #223 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Fri 14 Jun 19 08:47

    
Would stopping pumping from the Ogalalla aquifer allow it to
recharge over time?  Asking as a geological question - is/was the
water in it from surface rainfall, or is it a lens in a lower layer,
ancient water trapped by geology?
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #224 of 231: Andrew Alden (alden) Fri 14 Jun 19 10:26

    
It's mostly ancient water, being very slowly recharged by precipitation.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #225 of 231: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Fri 14 Jun 19 10:47

    
It's an ice age artifact, ISTR.   It's apt to be a while before the next 
one.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #226 of 231: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Fri 14 Jun 19 11:05

    
Yeah, that's what I thought...

I wonder how much we've contributed to sea level rise simply by
pumping sequestered water back into the system.  Probably not a lot,
but probably not trivial either.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #227 of 231: hiker (supine) Wed 20 Nov 19 03:47

    
Reminds me of that clever Medea Hypothesis, wherein multicellular
life is an aberration and single-cell life tries everything to
destroy it, explaining many of the mass die-offs in geoscale
history. It's funny to think of us as the tricky insurgents that
finally get the job done in the end. 
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #228 of 231: The ineluctable modality of the risible. (patf) Wed 4 Dec 19 11:15

    
Multicellular life was probably only possible once Earth's
atmosphere oxygenated - and once that had happened the amount of
energy available to life was so much greater that multicellular life
was possibly inevitable.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Oxidation_Event

We increasingly know the ages of the earth, over its whole history,
fairly well.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #229 of 231: The ineluctable modality of the risible. (patf) Wed 4 Dec 19 11:22

    
The abstract says maybe not all but enough.

Reactive Oxygen Species: Radical Factors in the Evolution of Animal
Life: A molecular timescale from Earth's earliest history to the
rise of complex life.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29411901
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #230 of 231: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Wed 4 Dec 19 13:47

    
Cyanobacteria are our friends.
  

inkwell.vue.506 : State of the World 2019
permalink #231 of 231: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Dec 19 14:55

    
State of the World 2020 is just a few weeks away, beginning January
7, 2020, after we've recovered from the transition and dusted off
our synapses...
  

