inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #0 of 223: What is going to amuse our bouches now? (bumbaugh) Wed 30 Dec 09 13:57

    
For the eleventh time, Inkwell rings in the New Year with a visit from Well
member Bruce Sterling, to address the State of the World and Things Various
and Sundry. Bruce used to write novels when there were bookstores, and used
to write for magazines and newspapers when magazines and newspapers existed.
Nowadays he travels a lot when trains are running and when airports aren't
clogged by security theater.

Once again, Bruce's interlocutory partner is Jon Lebkowsky. Jon writes about
culture, society, technology. He is an Internet pioneer and thought leader
immersed in contemporary social technologies, with expertise in digital
communication and collaboration. An early online community moderator on The
Well, and a founder of Fringeware, Inc., Jon has been a direct participant
in the formative conversations that generated our contemporary global
digital society. He's worked with bOING bOING, HotWired, The Whole Earth
Catalog, Electric Minds, Whole Foods Market, and many other web and
cyberculture projects and endeavors during the World Wide Webâ€™s first
decade. With Mitch Ratcliffe, Jon co-edited the book Extreme Democracy, and
he was one of the webâ€™s first bloggers, having blogged regularly since
2000.

Gentlemen, the turning of the calendar finds me vacationing in Times Square.
Where are you, and what's on your minds? Is it me, or is there a lot to talk
about this time around?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #1 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 30 Dec 09 15:54

    
I think you're right - the polarity of the world is changing,
literally and figuratively; the climate's wonky, the economy's tumbling
like a house of cards in a demented wind, political will is weak and
the body politic is disfigured in ways that are gross and fascinating.
It's a circus, and the tent's on fire.

I asked around for thoughts about what we should discuss, and got this
from science-fiction author, Internet maven, and new Dad, Cory
Doctorow:

"Bruce, you're godfather to my daughter Poesy. As I type this, I am
sitting in the driveway with her while she finishes her nap in the back
of the rental car we picked up on our Xmas holiday with the rest of
our family. I listen to her snoring away back there, and I think about
the enormity of fatherhood, and I realize that I've never been
confident enough in the future to make any kind of long-time plans...
Instead, I've always treated the future as a kind of unpredictable
lurching thing, and tried to keep my stance loose and wide so that I
could adjust my center of gravity from moment to moment as it shifted
beneath me. As a father, that strategy seems somehow irresponsible. Now
I'm thinking about college funds, about my will, about where I'll end
up living, all this stuff, and I realize that in order to do any of
this I have to have some coherent picture of where the future is
heading. If you were in my shoes, what concrete, discrete, individual
steps would you take on behalf of your snoring little toddler? "

I think that's a great first question.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #2 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 31 Dec 09 02:03

    
*Great to see that the burdens of fatherhood have succeeded in
rendering even Cory Doctorow all bourgeois.  A decade will do that to a
guy.

*Godfathers should be giving great advice, right?  No.  Actually, what
godfathers should be giving is MONEY.  If you're a comely young
goddaughter, your godfather should knock it off with his sermonizing
and give you, like, a car.  

*Well, I don't have any money now.  Neither does anybody else.  Even
the smart operators with truckloads of money, like Gates, have lost
more money than the GDP of Nicaragua.  So it'll have to be the advice. 
Brace yourself.

*Okay, first, the college funds.  Cory, you're a guy who rather
famously dropped out of college.  I completed college with a lucrative
degree in (wait for it) JOURNALISM.  There are people coming out of
colleges now with humanities degrees and debtloads of $100K.  What
precise benefit are you trying to confer here?  You want your kid to go
to some college?  Move to a country like Italy where they've got FREE
college, and people don't leave school till they're 28 years old.

*Okay, you've treated your future as an "unpredictable lurching
thing..." and now you're all morose about that...  You and your
generation CREATED that situation!  Ever heard of "disruptive
innovation," "disintermediation," "offshoring," "small pieces loosely
joined," "de-monetization," "plug and play," "the network as a
platform"?  Of course you've heard of all that crap, because you've
been tub-thumping it your entire adult life,  but what the hell did you
think that was all about?  Did you think you were gonna bend every
effort to virtualize reality, and then get a gold railway-retirement
watch and a safe place to park the cradle?  Guys with stacks of gold
bars and working oil wells don't have any stability now!   Much less
guys like you, who move their fingers up and down on keyboards for a
living.  

*You want some security?  Demand government housing subsidies and a
guaranteed minimum income!  They bailed out every broke mogul on the
planet, they might as well bail out the civil population.

*Your will. Great.  I think it's a good idea to write one of these. 
It's clarifying to contemplate mortality.  Try not to get all hackerly
about it and make it all super-complicated so that your heirs are
"protected forever."  Dead guys don't protect anybody, and the
survivors don't care.  When you're dead, mostly the survivors want to
grieve, sweep up after you, and stay out of endless court proceedings. 
A guy like you, you're gonna be too clever by half with the damn will,
lots of spreadsheets, flowcharts....  Basically, you want to save
people trouble sweating over your obscure 12-dollar Latvian royalties
getting probated in Canada.

*"Where I'll end up living." You're a Canadian always in California
who's married to a Briton who's always in Japan.  Obviously you're not
gonna "end up" anywhere. Forget about that.  What are you worried
about, your IKEA furniture?  There is no "end up."  Someday they're
gonna bury you someplace -- that's likely relatively permanent -- or
they might lock you in a prison or a clinic where they won't let you
out.  Other than that, you have made your mobile bed and you oughta lie
in it.

*You're thinking: "got some money here, might as well settle down in
suburban Shepperton where the kid has a stable neighborhood with those
delightful Ballard children." That's a joke.  They're ALL FOREIGNERS in
Shepperton now, just like you.  They're living in DISINTEGRATED,
ROOTLESS, MULTI-ETHNIC HOUSEHOLDS where people relate through SMS
messages.  Go outside, walk around in extremely globalized London,
count the number of exiles in the streets.  Is that Christopher Robin
and Pooh at the gates of Buckingham Palace?  The Buckingham Palace
charades are wall to wall Brazilians, Indians and Chinese.  That's why
they put up with YOU.  And the genuine kids there are even weirder than
their parents, because they're multi-ethnic Brazilo-Indian-Chinese
kids.

*"A coherent picture of where your future is heading."  Okay, fine.
Let's imagine you're three years old again.  You want to give your Dad,
back in 1974, a coherent picture of what 2010 looks like.  You know,
something very actionable, lucid and practical, where he can just slap
the cash on the counter and everything works out great for the family. 
Okay: given what you know now about the present, tell me what you
oughta tell him about 2010, back in 1974. Use words of one syllable, so
he doesn't have a stroke.

*Then, I'll give it a shot.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #3 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 31 Dec 09 07:38

    
While we wait for that, how about a coherent vision of where the
*present* is heading? Various entities and institutions have scrambled
together safety pins and gobs of glue to rig the global economy so that
it appears to be ambling along, but isn't it a great conceptual Jenga,
ready to fall if you move the wrong block? What kind of shuffling and
reshuffling can we expect, if there's a global economic meltdown? And
has the collapse already happened - are we like the coyote, run far
beyond the edge of the cliff, waiting for gravity's effect?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #4 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 1 Jan 10 02:39

    
I'm liking the Jenga analogy, but not the collapse, too much -- the
folk-notions people have about collapse and meltdown are way too
parochial, they're very Teabagger, very prepper.  

Basically we've got an emergent, market-driven global financial system
that was all about a faith-based market fundamentalism.  It was
deprived of oversight for three good reasons (a) it rapidly brought
prosperity to billions (b) under globalization, money is inherently
global while governance is inherently local (c) complete regulatory
capture of the system -- nobody but bankers understands how to bank.
There's no caste of regulators left anywhere who have the clout or even
the knowledge to do anything usefully stabilizing. No, not even if you
give them guns, lawyers, money and back issues of DAS KAPITAL.

*Too big to fail.  So, what can you do?  Cross your fingers,
basically.  Make some reassuring noises.  Cheerlead instead of
reforming the infrastructure.  And pawn what's left of the credibility
of government.

*Twenty years ago, it seemed like this situation might lead to
shareholder power, a kind of pension-fund ownership society.  It kind
of did, for a while.  But over a longer term, the poor engineering told
on the rickety, fungus-like structure of finance.  The wealth and the
executive capacity drifted into the hands of moguls.  Not governments,
big institutions, megacorporations, multinationals, but moguls, weird
eccentrics, like Russian moguls.  Madoff figures, Enron.  Nobody was
left to look.  Even if they did look, all they could possibly see in
Madoff and Enron was a genius, highly charitable head of the NASDAQ and
the world's most nimble and innovative energy company.  It's like
looking at your SUV and seeing drowning polar bears.  Just a minority
viewpoint.

*So we've ended up with our current "It's a Wonderful Life"
Pottersville, where Rupert Murdoch plays our Mr Potter.  Everybody who
should have been down at the mall last Christmas stocking up at the
Sharper Image is ruined, corrupted, prostituted, miserable, or a
hysterical librarian.  That includes the boisterous high-tech guys at
the deceased Sharper Image.  And, really, including Murdoch. 
Everything the guy touches turns brown.  

*Societies that are top-heavy in this way are just not gonna have
major prosperity.  Too much of the civil population has been fenced off
from the trough.  The wealth-generating capacity of the society has
been short-circuited.  There's zero political will to socialize the
entire planet and re-channel its currency flows, so that's not gonna
happen.  Basically, the political class is waiting for the civil
population to come back to the church of the free market and get over
the fact that its cardinals walk in public with no clothes on.

*So you're just not gonna see a lively, vibrant scene in Pottersville.
  You can have a Japanese Pottersville, where everybody's getting
older and they're building huge concrete bridges to nowhere.  Or a
Managed Democracy Putin-Pottersville, where everybody agrees not to say
anything much about the many Potemkin aspects.  You could even get
some Rio de Janeiro Pottersville full of armed, dropout-ethnic
shantytowns where everybody's high on medical marijuana.  But not
prosperity.  Because Madoff can't give you that.  For thirty years,
yeah, but for forever, no.

*People have stymied sense of denial about the situation.  It's very
neurotic, anxious, and repressed.  It's feeding into a strongly Gothic
political temperament where popular culture is haunted by vampires and
zombies.  The population *identifies* with vampires and zombies, wants
to marry them, settle down with them.  There's an autumnal hush over
the cultural landscape.  People really hope they won't be hit between
the eyes with the two-by-four again, but they also know that they are
helpless to defend themselves against the sources of the blows.  

*You're starting to see weird forms of acting-out, neurotic
displacement activities.  Fetishes, even.  Sarah Palin, for instance. 
I could go on about that woman every day.  And so can everybody else,
which is why they do.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #5 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 1 Jan 10 03:07

    
*I'm looking over my Twitter stream here, because it seems a more
useful barometer to me now than Google News.  Google News definitely
has that rickety Jenga feeling that JonL is talking about.  Whenever
you see something on Google News nowadays, you have to wonder: "who
owns this so-called news organization now? What's left of them
financially?  Is there even a shred of objective fact in this?"  

*It's like looking at something that used to be a warm, thick,
consensus-manufacturing comforter, and realizing that it's built
entirely out of Gothic spiderwebs from Mountain View.

*Most of my Twitter tweeple, in expressing their mild hopes for the
decade, seem obscurely terrified. "Well, it couldn't possibly be any
worse than last year," seems to be the consensus notion.  I haven't
seen any Scrooge-like spoilsport remarking on the prospect that the
twenty-teens could easily be MUCH, MUCH worse than the zeroes.  The
Depression of the 1930s was followed by the 1940s, right?  It's casino
thinking to imagine that the next poker hand is bound to be great just
because you lost your ass in the last one.

*There are some certain people in my Twitter list, though, who do seem
genuinely perky about last year and in a buoyant mood for the next.  I
can list them pretty easily, because they are so few.

A.  Augmented Reality people.  They're all like, "Wow!  What a ride! 
The wife is pregnant!  I bought a house!  When do we cash out?"

B. Cellphone guys, or rather, guys in the handset PDA Google-Android
Iphone-Appstore weird flaky gizmo in your pocket space.  They're used
to working in corrupt dungeons covered with moss and rusty manacles,
because they have to hang out with telephone companies.  Business is
great.  Mostly political rather than technical, but great.

C.  Brazilians.  I don't understand why Brazilians don't whine and
complain more, because by world standards their country is still awful,
with weird crap going on like armed dope favelas that shoot police
helicopters and even ethnic pogroms of harmless Brazilian merchants in
Surinam, but Brazilians are like, "Wow!  I'm big on Orkut!  Look at my
new haircut!"  They're like the least High-Tech Gothic and most Favela
Chic of all the emergent powers.  If they'd just grin more and say
"have a nice day" they could be the new Norteamericanos.

D.  Bollywood guys.  I think everybody on Twitter should follow at
least some celebrities.  Celebrity-followship is a major part of the
Twittersphere. I wouldn't dream on wasting any time on Demi or Oprah,
but Bollywood fan culture is fascinating.  The hero-star contingent are
getting a little more boring since they're getting the hang of it, but
those first few months, when they were just sorta blurting out
whatever they wanted off the Blackberry, that was awesome.  You really
get a feeling for Bollywood stars as a semi-solid, political-feudal
caste from a massively populated, deeply troubled, hugely resilient,
titanic emergent world power.  

*They're all Indian patriots.  Every one of 'em.  They're not
pollyannas about it, but you never hear a cynical or dismissive or
despairing remark from them.  About the press, certainly, but about the
Indian government or Indian civil society, never.  Tremendous work
ethic. Even the ones who come across like half-naked decadent femmes
fatale are complete Type A overachievers.  Very bouncy, very focussed. 
Educated.  World travellers.  It's impressive.

*I don't follow Chinese guys on Twitter yet.  Trying to figure out
how.  
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #6 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 1 Jan 10 03:11

    
*Oh yeah.  One other guy on my Twitter list. I forgot him.  Andrew
Keen.  "Cult of the Amateur" Andrew Keen, "Antichrist of Silicon
Valley" Andrew Keen.  This is obviously a guy with a very dark,
combative temperament, a Lenny Bruce figure almost, but he seems
convinced that time is on the side of his analysis and that vindication
awaits him.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #7 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 1 Jan 10 03:57

    
This view of the present feels right, and in a sense hopeless. But the
future is opaque, it's hard to imagine any optimistic scenario that
feels real. Throughout the 20th century we could imagine a "great
society," a "space age," a "long boom." We presumed future
social/technical advance, progress, improvement, a presumption that was
inherent in cultural and political artifacts of the time. Though we've
seen ongoing technological progress, But for thinking people assessing
today's reality, I think it's harder to imagine that the world twenty
years from now will be better than the world today. 

However Sarah Palin's world-view seems to disregard any sense that
we're fragile or imperiled, and of course that sells, the way that a
self-help book or a Zig Ziglar seminar sells. It's an assertion of
optimism, however unfounded. And I think it's a dangerous optimism,
because it assumes that we can do business as usual, and everything the
world will just work.

What vision for the future could a leader offer today that doesn't
ignore troubling but real issues like climate change and economic
instability, but doesn't feel hopeless?

(Posts 5 and 6 slipped in while I was writing this one.)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #8 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 1 Jan 10 07:09

    
The best tweet I saw New Year's Eve was Dusty Reagan's: "2010 and
still no flying cars...*sigh*." 

And today, the first day of the new year, Thomas Vanderwal says:
"Rather tired of 2010 predictions already. Most are stating what
happened in the last 2 years or so when they weren't paying attention."


We're in a world where everybody can have a top ten list and the means
to publish it. When I Google "top 10" + 2009, I get 115 *million*
hits. Predictions + 2010 has 12.8 million. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #9 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 2 Jan 10 02:47

    
Well, the Chinese world is better.  China's like flying-car and
personal-robot better, compared to China in 1969.

India's better.  Fantastically better.  India used to be in more or
less the same cramped livestock-stall as Sri Lanka, Myanmar (okay,
"Ceylon" and "Burma" -- this need to rename cities and nations is a
sign of mental illness) Pakistan, East Pakistan "Bangladesh" --
nowadays the Indians get all kinds of juice and respect from the
"international community," and better yet, all their local rivals are
in the charity ward without the Indians even firing a shot.

Brazilians are better.  Lula's been a great Brazilian president.  The
currency's stable, there's low inflation, there's oil money and ethanol
money, and when the Brazilian cop SWAT squads go gun down leftist
evangelical drug gangs wholesale in the ghetto, sometimes people even
notice.  

Americans who really needed some Vision Thing could go read some Lula
speeches -- he's done about a million -- all about peace and justice
and decent housing and ecology and the achievement of zero hunger and
all that.  You know, it's like a multiracial labor-union socialist
community-organizer thing, the Lula regime in Brazil.  

Surely Americans wouldn't go for that, though. There's just no way. 
Not the American Way.  American Way of Life Not Up For Negotiation. 
End of story.

Americans really want and need and desire a Futuristic Vision Thing,
they get all lonesome and moody without one, but it's absolutely gotta
be one of those good-old-fashioned American Futuristic Vision Things,
just like the Americans had in the 1950s when everybody else was still
on fire from total war and cleaning up the death camps.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #10 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 2 Jan 10 02:50

    
Hey look, I wrote a new architecture-fiction story.  Just for you guys
who can't pay for printed magazines any more, and therefore doomed
literature to an Andrew Keen descent into half-baked Internet
virtual-totalitarianism.

"The Hypersurface of This Decade"

http://bit.ly/8RRbsZ 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #11 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 10 05:25

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 2 Jan 10 08:10>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #12 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 10 08:19

    
Jamais Cascio suggested in a private email that we consider whether
California's travails are predictive of a broader failures within the
USA, and asks "if we're not seeing many signs of real hope, are we at
least seeing signs of getting through the problems we face?" I can
imagine complex yes and no answers...

But that's the U.S., and you make the point that other parts of the
world appear to be swimming along pretty well. 

But I wonder whether they're becoming more 20th century U.S., i.e. are
they firing up high-standard economies and lifetyles by burning
through finite resources?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #13 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 2 Jan 10 14:33

    
Well, there's no question that California's beloved of futurists,
maybe because California's got so many futurists in it.

It's hard for anyone from Texas to find the chutzpah to complain about
California's state politics.  For instance, Enron, a Texas company,
basically decapitated California by illegally gaming the natural gas
pipelines, and then getting a surprised and hapless Gray Davis run out
of office.  Ever since then, they've been stuck with Schwarzenegger,
who's a cartoon figure.  California's never done anything half that
wicked to Texas.

There are other states with state governments that are worse and more
irresponsible than California's.  There's Louisiana, Arizona, Oklahoma
of course, and when it comes to electing swaggering guys with a lot of
muscles because they can supposedly bench-press the state legislature,
I'm looking at you, Minnesota.

But there aren't any state governments with absolute tons of money and
colossal populations that are as doctrinaire, hog-tied and amateurish
as California's state government.  They've become scary rather than
enviable.  I'm very fond of the culture of the Golden State, and there
are many admirable people there who are both wise and inventive, but
their state politics are just dreadful. It's like they re-invented
Sacramento as a highway snarl.

I'd never write 'em off, but I don't think they deserve their former
reputation as a leading polity among American states. These days they
serve as an exemplar of how not to go about things. 

The USA has fifty different states. It seems pretty likely that at
least some of 'em are gonna manifest some hopeful signs of getting
through the general problems the nation faces.  Maybe it's time to stop
kicking Californians when they're down, and search for some other
bellweather state that seems to be getting a grip.  California's been
losing population for the last four years.  They've gotta be going
somewhere.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #14 of 223: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Sat 2 Jan 10 14:39

    
North Dakota is doing pretty well.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #15 of 223: KUMBAYISTA! (smendler) Sat 2 Jan 10 16:02

    
So are we simply moving into a time of more *efficient* suffering?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #16 of 223: Sebastian Mendler (smendler) Sat 2 Jan 10 16:08

    
(btw, loved the story - hopefully the guy extrudes himself a machete
while he's at it)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #17 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 2 Jan 10 16:21

    
What about green energy? It's not covered much by the press, but it
seems like the investments made by the Chinese government and the U.S.
Department of Energy are looking pretty encouraging.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #18 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 2 Jan 10 16:37

    
After reading the story: so the next thing is to extrude habitat like
some kind of caterpillar?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #19 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 10 17:33

    
What Jamais actually wrote, when I asked him for thoughts about what
we might discuss, was this: "California as a foretaste of where the US
as a whole seems to be going." I think he's focused there because he
lives there; didn't interpret it as a bashing. Good point that the
fifty states (and all the various global nations, for that matter) are
unique entities with diverse strains of legislative DNA.

While we're at it, here's another from Jamais' missive:
"Geoengineering: 2009, Geo went mainstream in the media; 2010, it's
probably going to hit the political world. It looks very likely to
happen, but also looks very likely to trigger conflict. Would love
Bruces' thoughts on the subject."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #20 of 223: Linda Castellani (castle) Sat 2 Jan 10 18:22

    

Bruce, when I read your response to <doctorow>'s e-mail re-examining his
life with a new father's eyes, I didn't see a response to the
sentimentality underlying his question, which made me wonder if there was
some subtext I was not aware of, and if not, could I ask you to revisit
his questions, being a father yourself?  Did you have similar questions
about navigating aspects of parenthood when you were a new father?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #21 of 223: Linda Castellani (castle) Sat 2 Jan 10 18:23

    

jonl slipped.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #22 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 2 Jan 10 19:21

    
<The wealth and the executive capacity drifted into the hands of
moguls.>


Hello again, Bruce, and welcome.  Do you see any way to make these
plutocrats more accountable for the warming air that the rest of us
mortals must breath?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #23 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 3 Jan 10 01:53

    
"Making plutocrats more accountable."  Dunno.  In the past decade we
seem to have created two new social classes, unaccountable global
moguls with no regulations, and global unlawful combatants with no
civil rights.  It's either the penthouse or Guantanamo, and they're
both invisible netherworlds out of reach of the rule of law. Both very
dangerous to the rest of us.  Not just that they assault us, but that
we neglect the issues there.

Putin more or less solved his own mogul problem by picking on one
scapegoat mogul and having the guy railroaded into the slammer. 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky was as crooked as a dog's hind leg, but clearly
he's in the Russian Bastille there at the pleasure of the state, so
Khodorkovsky's kind of a unique example of a guy who's both an oligarch
and an abductee.  You'd think this was a pretty likely treatment for
oligarchs, actually.  Given that they create so much misery, destroy so
much wealth, and harm the interests of so many other social classes,
why not just car-bomb them?  Russian moguls used to car-bomb each other
with great glee.  The same goes for mafia chieftains -- anybody with
tremendous wealth and influence outside the rule of law ends up in
great fear of others with similar characteristics.

Jailing Khodorkovsky sure didn't make anybody more "accountable" to
the civil population, though; it's just another example of Putin's
political genius for fighting ugly wildfires with dirty water.  The
Russians sincerely love that guy Putin.  I think his policies are
spooky and pernicious, but Putin's so much better than the normal run
of leaders the Russians get that you have to understand why they
genuflect to him.

There are some societies today completely untroubled by moguls, like,
say, Sweden.  You look at all the statistics that technocrats use to
determine where people are doing just great, where society is thriving,
and Sweden's been in the top five percentile for decades.  Sweden does
everything perfectly from a technocratic policy perspective, Sweden's
like Oz, apparently.  

And then you ask Swedes about their future and so forth, and they're
like: "Bring the razor and the bathtub!  When can I die?"  There are
penniless, vitamin-deprived guys in the Dharavi slums of Mumbai who are
upbeat and perky compared to Swedes.

"Out of the crooked timber of humanity no straight thing was ever
made," as the philosopher used to say.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #24 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 3 Jan 10 03:32

    
On the subject of geo-engineering, I think it's a crock. We'll never
get there.  They're all techie fantasies, far-out sci-fi notions, Star
Wars physics-style.  The cheapest and most effective method of
geo-engineering is to cut the world's population in half.  

Just a tremendous massacre. That's the genuinely effective
geo-engineering: it's fast, it commonly works, it's been proven
effective for centuries by lebensraum exponents everywhere,  and if you
chose the right tactics and weaponry it might even look like a big
accident.

  You don't have to put on a fascist armband and start ranting for the
public's blood; an effort like that could be quite subtle and covert,
the very opposite of showboat geo-engineering.  "Mysterious deadly flu
in the Congo?  We'd better keep all our health workers right here,
they're badly needed in New York!"

Nobody's gonna sit around watching Copenhagen delegates debating giant
phony orbital solar mirrors if the windmills in Copenhagen harbor are
blowing over  When and if it becomes obvious that we truly need
massive, ultra-costly geo-engineering interventions, that we have no
other choice, then somebody -- likely some traumatized veterans of
weather havoc who are full of Al Qaeda self-righteousness -- they're
gonna cut emissions in half by cutting people in half.  Mankind
wouldn't lack for means, motive, opportunity and eager volunteers.

Genocide has much more proven shelf-appeal than any of these hokum
Rube Goldberg geo-schemes.  It's by no means easy to kill off half of
everybody, but we've already invented a wide variety of ingenious ways
to attempt that, and almost all of 'em are much simpler, more rugged
and more plausible than putting the North Pole under a tinfoil hat.  

You don't see these Gothic issues raised in public discourse much, but
you go hang out with some Beltway thinktank asymmetric-warfare types,
and man, they talk this kinda stuff all the time.  Kind of a Herman
Kahn think-the-unthinkable industry.   "Should the Center for Disease
Control be scanning flu-strains for signs of designed interventions?"
"Gee uh, maybe not, could cause panic... but if we had some
off-the-books funding for that, that capacity could be pretty handy." 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #25 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 3 Jan 10 04:05

    
*Y'know, these very dark imaginings of utter civilizational mayhem --
I have to confess I don't find them very interesting. People always ask
me about 'em, more so now than before, but I'm unmoved.  It's routine.

*When I was a college student in the 1970s, cataclysms were pretty
interesting to me, in a kind of edgy "No Future" punk way.  By now
they've been almost completely mainstreamed.  As a creative, I find
that they lack their old charm.

*Standard Hollywood fodder, full of this stuff now: "2012," "The
Road," comic shoot-'em-up zombie movies... people are *keenly* aware
that Banquo's ghost is hammering the front door.  They don't really
need to be beaten over the head with this by doomsayers.  

*Yeah, sure, people, we could all die suddenly and horribly, but we
could have all died suddenly and horribly any time after the invention
of the hydrogen bomb.  That's not really news, it doesn't attract or
inspire me; I write about in the obligatory way that I have to write
about, say, heroin or traffic jams, but my former interest in these
issues is kinda crotchety and banal.  It makes me feel middle-aged,
quite frankly: way too much chewed cud there for us ahead-of-the-curve
cyberpunk dystopians.

*Then we've got entirely other kinds of stuff like this:
http://gishbar.blogspot.com/2010/01/chemical-composition-of-io.html

*Guys hanging around figuring out what Saturnian moons are made of. 
Pretty boring, apparently.  Even Star-Trek geeky astronaut worshippers
glaze over when they look at this stuff.  I have to say I adore it. 
It's really vivifying for me.  I truly feel proud and glad to be alive
in a time when my civilization can figure out -- with some actual
evidence and calculations, with on-site inspections even -- what
Saturn's moons are made of.  

*I don't even have the excuse of any Carl Sagan mystic-scientism
bullshit here, either; I don't think we climbed out of the primal muck
to go mess around with sulfates on Io. 

*Io is a complete mess.  It's a world much like our world, a neighbor
world of ours,  but it's utterly beyond all redemption, it's off the
charts alien.  We have no instrumental uses for the place, it's not
worth a dime, it's way past each, all and every standard of Earthly
ruin.  But it's a world, all right.  It's just great that we've got it
together to take a coherent interest in such things.

*Kind of a minority taste of mine there, but it's kind of like the
minority taste for a really great vintage Barolo.  "Weird red wine from
some rural village I never heard of?  Who cares?"  Then you have a sip
of a great Barolo and it immediately transforms your backward
personality.  Two bottles later, and you're a more civilized human
being.  You never go back, either.  You get stretched by the experience
and you grow.

*The good life is like that.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #26 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 3 Jan 10 07:51

    
It's interesting to look at the traditionalist vs modernist approaches
to Barolo production, as described in the Wikipedia article on Barolo
as "the Barolo wars." (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barolo) What
evolves is a mashup of traditional and modern approaches to leverage
the strengths of each. Where else can we see that happening? I've had
conversations aboout the future of journalism (most recently with
journalist Pete Lewis, who's got a Stanford fellowship to give him
space to think about such things), and forward-thinking journalists
like Pete are trying to figure out how bloggers and journalists can
relate to each other - again, how you retain the strengths of
traditional journalism and leverage the persistent and extended focus
that bloggers can have, working outside market constraints. 

As digital convergence progresses and the future emerges from the past
and present, you see more and more of this sort of thing. Healthcare
is another example - the world of medicine is changing radically as
patients become more knowledgeable - often enough they'll have
knowledge about their condition that their physicians lack, because
they have access to the data via the Internet, and strong motive for
better understanding what's happening to their bodies. Physicians get
this, and a sometimes uneasy partnership is forming between the more
knowledgeable patients and treatment providers - participatory
medicine. You also see organizations like Science Commons/Health
Commons pushing for open data on medical research, and there's pressure
(built into healthcare reform, but already building before that
legislative wrangling even started) to make all health records digital.
Patients are demanding access to their digital records so that they
can validate their accuracy - bad data in your health record can kill
you, so they have a real stake.

Journalism and healthcare are a couple of examples, but you see this
stuff happening elsewhere. We also see a fragmentation of mindshare
into niche areas of focus; it's really hard to build a mass audience.
Marketers are freaking out and trying to redefine what they do as
"social media" practice, though rather than bring the strengths of old
and new approaches together, marketing people seem confused and unable
to let go of a sense of control and certainty, so they persist the
weaknesses of their traditional approaches, carrying those weaknesses
into new online social environments.

Digital is transforming the way we do politics, the way we make war,
the way we prepare food, the way we create and perceive cultural
artifacts, the way we build prototypes and manufacture products. 

You've written and thought about this convergence for years,
especially from a design perspective. What significant changes are you
seeing that most fascinate you?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #27 of 223: The devil is in the detail (robertflink) Sun 3 Jan 10 10:45

    
Great conversation even if it leaves me a little intellectually
breathless.  

I tend to think that much of modernity rests on an infrastructure run
effectively by experts of various stripe while we pay attention to the
so-called "movers and shakers" public and private.  

Any comments on or tends among these infrastructure experts that we
should give a little attention to from time to time?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #28 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 3 Jan 10 10:59

    
The media never covers green energy.  Would a hundred billion pounds
do it for ya?

http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/jan/03/gordon-brown-wind-energy-progra
mme
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #29 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Sun 3 Jan 10 12:20

    
>Healthcare
is another example - the world of medicine is changing radically as
patients become more knowledgeable - often enough they'll have
knowledge about their condition that their physicians lack, because
they have access to the data via the Internet, and strong motive for
better understanding what's happening to their bodies. Physicians get
this, and a sometimes uneasy partnership is forming between the more
knowledgeable patients and treatment providers - participatory
medicine.

Participatory medicine is a palliative and helps but doesn't speak to
the underlying problem, which is information overload. The amount of
medical information available both on the general side -- biological +
medical + genomic; and on the specific side -- patient records, tests,
images, and genome -- is utterly beyond any physicians or other humans.
And it enlarges daily. It's a total mismatch, made much worse by the
almost incomprehensible reticence of many physicians and hospitals to
move not out of the 20th but out of the 19th century in record keeping,
as anyone who has ever seen a disorderly pile of folders of
handwritten papers and printouts -- "these are your records" knows.

A guy who is trying to change this equation on both sides, the
research and the individual clinical is Carl Kesselman (confession; I
work with him); one of the co-inventors of Grid -> Cloud computing.
He's got a pile of money from a bunch of sources and he's working on
creating a Center for Health Informatics -- 
http://www.chigrid.org/about.html 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #30 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Sun 3 Jan 10 12:22

    
Here's Carl's explanation of what he's doing
http://viterbi.usc.edu/news/news/2009/carl-kesselman-discusses.htm
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #31 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 3 Jan 10 15:02

    
Nice rant but I gotta point out that Io is a moon around Jupiter, not
Saturn.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #32 of 223: Rick Brown (danwest) Sun 3 Jan 10 17:34

    
Details. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #33 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 3 Jan 10 21:57

    
It's pretty fascinating - Wikipedia's Io page has quite a bit of data
and links to various image pages:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Io_%28moon%29
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #34 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 10 01:32

    
*Man, what are we gonna do with these left-wing pointy-headed
scientist geek types who insist that Jupiter and Saturn aren't the same
place.  Jupiter and Saturn are both PAGAN GODS, fella! Wake up! You in
your so-called secular religious arrogance, you are WORSHIPPING PAGAN
GODS and you don't even realize it!  You and your Io -- a pagan goddess
shaped like a cow! -- it's the biggest socialist hoax since evolution
and global warming.

*Put down the dang Wikipedia and get right with the Gospel, fella.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #35 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Mon 4 Jan 10 02:06

    
Which brings up a real problem. 

People used to think that if scientists said we had a problem, we had
a problem, and even though attacks against researchers who touched
nerves were not unknown (ask Nobel Laureate Sherrie Rowlands about what
happened when he connected flourocarbons and the ozone hole) the
debate remained about science. 

Now, we have total illiterates shouting at the top of their lungs on
media that science is a hoax and a conspiracy, and it's working. Where
the hell do we go from here?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #36 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 10 02:10

    
*Digital revolutionizes this, digital revolutionizes that...  Yeah,
it's been quite a spectacle, but after watching it so long, it's become
kind of obvious to me that digital is actually best at revolutionizing
digital.  The Revolution Eats Its Young.  Digital is always attacking,
disrupting, and disintermediating itself faster than digital ever
changes anything else.

*So it's not like we shove a dysfunctional health system through the
digital Wonderland mirror, and then we get a nifty digital health
system. That never happens for anybody, for any institution, profession
or system of governance.   It's more like we shove some creaking
analog system through a whole dizzy hall of digital mirrors, until we
forget what a "health system" was in the first place.  Doctors get
redefined as self-educated social networking geeks who have some kind
of vague interest in the human body, but are mostly busy upgrading
their netbooks and seeking a revenue model. Which they don't have.

*You can read an Internet guidebook from the 1990s and it's like
they're talking about a different planet.  You know, Saturn, Jupiter,
whatever....  There's a tremendous tone of urgency about what this
dusty old guidebook says -- "Drop every other concern, you need to do
this right away" -- but every strategy and tactic recommended there is
pitifully obsolete.  If you tried those things now you'd be gone in a
week.

*Internet stuff changes very fast, and the Internet's past just
vanishes.  Databases vanish, GeoCities, UseNet.  The Net's got huge
Gothic holes in it, places that looked solid and are just massive
hard-disk failures, grinding empty noises.  Or trash-heaps, huge spammy
trash-heaps generated by zombie botnets of abandoned robots. 

*An Internet year is like seven Earth years, so the Internet looks 210
years old in 2010.  It's forgotten how to be a solution to analog
problems, if it ever was any such thing.  As it's socializing, it's
becoming less a techie platform and more a human institution, and a
particularly frail, senile, piratical, treacherous weird one.

*Today, people look at our crazy, broken, self-absorbed finance
system, which we used to frankly worship like a pagan god, and they're
so full of bitterness and skepticism...  "How could they ever let
things get into such a parlous state!  What benefit did they ever bring
us? They're all crooks and charlatans!"  

I don't think that modern Internet zealots are crooks and charlatans,
but I see no reason why a weird system of small-pieces-loosely-joined
couldn't drift into fungal lunacy just like the financial system did. 
Maybe harder, faster, and less retrievably.  They're children of the
same era.  They're built with the same logic.

*After all -- who's minding the store there?  To what end?  It's all
about whatever seemed to work -- moguls, monopolies, offshoring... 
Works great technically (sometimes), might create utter social mayhem
(somebody else's problem).  All the broadband you can eat and you're
left with a mouthful of ashes.  

*If that happened, who would we blame for that?  Wouldn't we be
staring at each other with that same shocked, shocked look that Alan
Greenspan had in Congress?  "Gosh, I can't believe that they would
irrationally do such bad things to themselves."  Markets are not
inherently rational, and the Internet isn't rational either.  Not a bit
of it.

*Some day this too will pass.  "What comes after network culture?" 
We're so enmeshed in network culture that it's hard for us to envision
anything outside it now.  That's dangerous.  It's like believing in
contemporary finance to the point that alternatives become unthinkable.

Stewart Brand, years ago:  "And the larger fear looms: we are in the
process of building one vast global computer, which could easily become
The Legacy System from Hell that holds civilization hostage -- the
system doesn’t really work; it can’t be fixed; no one understands it;
no one is in charge of it; it can’t be lived without; and it gets worse
every year."  Does that sound familiar?  It's sounds plenty familiar
if you're talking about the global economy now, but that's not what
Stewart was talking about.

"Today’s bleeding-edge technology is tomorrow’s broken legacy system.
Commercial software is almost always written in enormous haste, at
ever- accelerating market velocity; it can foresee an 'upgrade path' to
next year’s version, but decades are outside its scope. And societies
live by decades, civilizations by centuries..."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #37 of 223: better smoke!!!! better mirrors!!! (robertflink) Mon 4 Jan 10 05:29

    
>And societies live by decades, civilizations by centuries..."<

Yet our "leaders" tell us that they are responsive to will and, thus,
can be dramatically and quickly altered as in "nation building" and
"health care", all without unintended consequences.  

While we are trying find leaders that can steer the beasts to our rosy
objectives, what of the fads and fashions of those that operate
elements of the systems we depend on?  While I agree no one is in
charge can we divine some early warning of change by observing the foot
work rather than the head fakes?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #38 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 10 06:39

    
"So it's not like we shove a dysfunctional health system through the
digital Wonderland mirror, and then we get a nifty digital health
system. That never happens for anybody, for any institution, profession
or system of governance.   It's more like we shove some creaking
analog system through a whole dizzy hall of digital mirrors, until we
forget what a 'health system' was in the first place."

Acknowledging and agreeing with your point that digital can be
disruptive and destructive (having never said otherwise), I'm not sure
I agree with your point about healthcare. Capturing and storing patient
data in a standard and patient-accessible way, and bringing the
patient into the healthcare conversation, seems like a net positive.
Opening data as broadly-shared research also seems like a positive - if
all researchers could access all pharma research data, how much faster
would treatments evolve? On the other hand, digitizing an analog mess
can leave us with a digital mess. But I think it's an
oversimplification to say that digital is *inherently* destructive. 

"Doctors get redefined as self-educated social networking geeks who
have some kind of vague interest in the human body, but are mostly busy
upgradin their netbooks and seeking a revenue model. Which they don't
have."

I've spent some time with physicians of late, and I don't see this
happening at all. Many are conservative about new digital foo, mainly
because they don't have time to think about it. Others are beginning to
adopt digital technology in constructive ways - using it, for
instance, for closer communication with patients. Still others, younger
guys in med school who have digital as a "first language," are just
inherently in the  digital world and fully expect to be doing digital
rounds and assessments. 

"Internet stuff changes very fast, and the Internet's past just 
vanishes. Databases vanish, GeoCities, UseNet.  The Net's got huge
Gothic holes in it, places that looked solid and are just massive
hard-disk failures, grinding empty noises.  Or trash-heaps, huge spammy
trash-heaps generated by zombie botnets of abandoned robots."

The stuff that was important to me is still around. I'm still talking
to you on the WELL after two decades hanging out here, and the
technical foundation is still the same - Picospan with Engaged sitting
on top of it. What vanishes disappears because it wasn't useful and
wasn't used, it's natural selection applied to technology.

Usenet never went away, it's active as ever. Ask Giganews. God knows
there's piles of steaming digital crap on digital servers everywhere,
but what's useful remains useful, for the most part. 

Otherwise agreeing with much of what you say. You ask "What comes
after network culture?" We might ask that differently - "What does
network culture become?" For me the emphasis is always on the social,
not the technical. The social web is bringing more and more people into
some kind of conceptual proximity, but the conversations are weirdly
disconnected - drive-by conversations, I often call them. The challenge
to me is to create real coherent social engagements that are less like
the barroom - people hanging out, talking at each other but not
necessarily with each other - and more like effective meetings, where
people come together with the idea of creating action items, getting
things done, producing deliverables. We could also benefit by
acknowledging, and overcoming, the echo chamber effect that this
technology supports so well - where we can select for conversation
those we agree with and exclude those we don't, so that we never have
to engage with conflicting views in a civil and meaningful way. I'd
love to see real dialog and deliberation with thinking people who have
opposing views - vs shouting machines between unthinking people who've
been propagandized and polarized.

Social media could be useful, if it was less marketing people and
self-helpers with their weird proliferation of numbered lists ("Ten
ways to build your Twitter following, never mind the conversation…"),
and more real people having authentic conversations about real problems
- and that's happening, too, I'm sure. There's just too little signal
in the noise at the moment.

Back to your question of what comes after network culture - do you
have a vision for that future?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #39 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 10 06:55

    
By the way, I think this is relevant:

"Educators say that, for adults, one way to nudge neurons in the right
direction is to challenge the very assumptions they have worked so
hard to accumulate while young."

http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/03/education/edlife/03adult-t.html
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #40 of 223: Cogito, Ergo Dubito (robertflink) Mon 4 Jan 10 07:24

    
Thanks for the link.  I now understand why I enjoy our Socrates Cafe
sessions here in the Twin Cities so much.





 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #41 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Mon 4 Jan 10 15:26

    
>Acknowledging and agreeing with your point that digital can be
disruptive and destructive (having never said otherwise), I'm not sure
I agree with your point about healthcare. Capturing and storing
patient
data in a standard and patient-accessible way, and bringing the
patient into the healthcare conversation, seems like a net positive.

Particularly compared with the existing situation. I mean, talk about
legacy system hell....
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #42 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Mon 4 Jan 10 16:00

    
But as long as we're crushing our digital hopes - one of the the
longest standing of these hopes is that digital can somehow encode that
granddaddy of legacy systems, our brains, and move our perceptions and
memories and emotions onto new platforms -- perhaps even immortality
on a chip, not the best place to be immmortal, but still maybe better
for some. That digital (back to the medicine thing) create much better
prosthesis for damaged limbs or even nerve tissue. Is this another SF
delusion or is the distance actually closing. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #43 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 5 Jan 10 05:39

    <scribbled>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #44 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 5 Jan 10 05:51

    
Bruce,

This odd article in yesterday's Seattle Times got me thinking about
your comments on Putin and the "Wild, Wild West" quality of
post-Soviet capitalism in Eastern Europe:

http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/storm/2010697655_bird05.html

First, I had no idea that stars from the WNBA (Women's Nat'l
Basketball Assoc.) were being showcased in Russia by
ex-KGB-cum-Mafioso types.  Very strange outgrowth from the wealth
amassed by the corrupt-to-the-core, find-a-horse-head-in-your-bed,
free-market
capitalism in the land formerly known as Behind-the-Iron-Curtain.

You also mentioned Sweden.  Nominally Lutheran, formerly homogeneous
Sweden has found itself in the precarious situation of having invested
heavily in Eastern Europe while, at home, trying to assimilate a new
immigrant population that often resists assimilation.  Right now
Swedes are mourning the loss of the Swedish national icon, SAAB, and
coping with the same Global economic declines that have hit most
everywhere.  

The Swedes cling to a social system where 80% of the population is
obstinately middle-class and well-protected by unions with long-held
givens like strong unemployment benefits and a bedrock, universal
healthcare system.  About 10% of the population is wealthy, about 10%
poor.  And, underlying the Swedish way is, by-and-large, a core
honesty and low-key social ethic infused through Swedish culture that
is being tested like never before by immigration, very high taxation,
electronically-cocooned and jaded youth, and questions about upholding
a social safety net that may be unsustainable.  Back in the height of
the Cold War, Sweden was said to
offer "The Middle Way" between US Capitalism and USSR Communism.

As the U.S. reels from the fallout from its own sordid brand of
unfettered corporate capitalism, coupled with our discombobulated
attempt at a hybrid National Healthcare system, I'm beginning to
wonder whether America is on the verge of adopting the more
centrally-controlled Swedish Way with its underlying "Social
Democracy", or if, at the slightest hiccup we'll be charging headlong
again toward the unbridled "wild, wild west" of eastern Europe.  (By
comparison to Sweden, in the US there is no longer a strong third leg
of employee unionism to counterbalance corporate private-sector power
and government public-sector power.)  

What would James West say?  What would Martin Luther say?  What would
Martin Luther King say?  What would the daughter of a socialist
governor in Sweden and cuckold "wife" of the richest American athlete
say? 

Is everything running amok and going berserk, as the Vikings would
say? Most importantly, are there notable glimmers of hope (say, from
the Climate summit in the Swedes' backyard of Copenhagen?)?  What's the
[S]terling answer?  
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #45 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 07:01

    
"Capturing and storing patient data in a standard and
patient-accessible way, and bringing the patient into the healthcare
conversation, seems like a net positive."  

Maybe, but that's also what the newspapers once thought, or pretended
to think...  "look, the Net allows us to bring the people formerly
known as the audience into the conversation! How grand!"  It also
allows Google to write eyeball-tracking algorithms that do a much
better job of agglomerating audiences and advertiser dollars than
newspapers could ever do.  End of newspapers.

Obviously there are some positives to that situation, but it's
disingenuous  to think that it's (a) technically inevitable or (b) it
serves the interests of democracy.

It's easy to point out downsides of tech developments when they're
employed by entities you already dislike and distrust.  For instance,
"chilling effect" and "mission creep" are always used in civil
liberties discourse, but nobody talks much about "chilling effects" and
"mission creep" in developments that we LIKE.  If you build a web 2.0
knowledge swapping network for patients, it's gonna get mission creep
pronto.

If patients end up doing their own diagnoses by aggregating patient
data, using Web 2.0 style collective intelligence, and especially if
they then start suing doctors who make demonstrable, dumb mistakes, the
practice of medicine will be wrecked. Not improved, wrecked.   It'll
be hugely damaged, in the same way that the music business was damaged
by Napster, and newspapers were wrecked by Craigslist, or the
Democratic Party was outmaneuvered and tamed by some Chicago guy who
had social media and a digital fundraising machine.

Doctors do make dumb mistakes all the time.  That's the nature of a
knowledge guild that restricts vital knowledge to a professional
clique.  

We didn't want amateur brain surgeons because they are dangerous
quacks without medical ethics.  But there's no physical reason why one
couldn't have amateur brain surgeons with instructables off Wikipedia,
and no reason why theses jaspers couldn't do a sort-of-okay job, too. 
Not perfect, but cheap and fast and distributed and upgradeable, like
Wikipedia compared to Encyclopedia Britannica.

That's network culture.  If medicine gets the big wikipedia treatment,
you don't get a computer-literate doctor, you get a doctor-literate
web activist. 

Doctors are keenly jealous of their pre-eminence.  They spent hard
years in med school, unlike Joe Keyboard.  Doctors also earn much, much
more money than they would if arteriosclerosis was re-defined as some
kind of hardware problem to be scanned by an iPhone app.  

You can argue that, "well, those arrogant gatekeeper-types, we oughta
let 'em have it," but the end-point of the path-toward-free is that
everything's sorta free and nobody's got a paying job.  Everybody in
capitalism is sitting on some kind of pinchpoint because that's where
the money-flow is.  

I kinda like the idea of a future world where everything's sorta free
and nobody's got a paying job, just like I'm frankly thrilled to see
advertising dying.  But if that's what we really want, we should start
small, and test that out with something reversible, like, say, a small
town where that seems to be working.  We shouldn't blithely let
convulsions happen while we're pretending to do something else.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #46 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 07:21

    
You know, I've been to Sweden a couple of times, and although I've
always been treated well and it's a society I respect very much, I
think I'd be hard put to live there.

I don't think it's got anything to do with Sweden, and everything to
do with the imp of the perverse.  People don't need what they want, and
don't want what they need.  My intuitions about this have been
sharpened by reading Vaclav Havel's new memoirs TO THE CASTLE AND BACK.
 It's about what happened to him and his circle and his society AFTER
the glorious 1989 revolution.

Havel's a tired, sick old man now, and he doesn't have the
revolutionary fire he once did, but he really is wise.  There's a lot
of stuff in there about people being surprised and even flummoxed by
the spectacular glee of being given what they want -- great things that
are clearly good for them.  They're better off by almost every
objective measure, and they'd never go back, but somehow they seem to
live less.

Havel talks a lot about the dangers of technocratic government in this
book.  Of handing over politics to well-trained experts who know what
they are doing and can prove it.  I happen to favor technocracy in
politics because I think politics ought to be dull, and business should
be rather dull too,  while efforts like science and the arts ought to
have all the vibrancy.  But after reading Havel's warnings about the
crimping and demeaning effect this has, the loss of a sense of purpose,
I'm troubled.

I don't think Havel has an answer, either.  He talks a lot about
eternity.  He's a moralist by nature with a faith in eternal values.
It's a sense of purpose that got him through five hard years in a
slammer that probably would have killed me dead, but he's a hero, and
I'm not.  

Even if I somehow turned to be a hero, through some godawful
circumstance, I'm pretty sure eternity would be the last thing on my
mind.

As for America somehow becoming like Sweden, that's about as likely as
 Mexico becoming like Sweden.  We might conceivably become rather more
like New England and less like the Confederacy.  We're a whole lot
like the Confederacy now, and it hasn't been good for us.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #47 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 09:03

    
>f patients end up doing their own diagnoses by aggregating patient
data, using Web 2.0 style collective intelligence, and especially if
they then start suing doctors who make demonstrable, dumb mistakes,
the practice of medicine will be wrecked. Not improved, wrecked.

I agree; it's wrong on so many levels. Every time I see an ad for a
drug on television, followed by the ritual recital of possible
catastrophes ("should not be taken by human beings with a pulse of more
than 30 beats per minute, may cause loss of appendages or homicidal
impulses, keep in explosion-proof storage container at a temperature of
less than -5 C,  my gorge rises. It's an abuse. 

I do think that the practice of medicine now desperately needs better
IT - for doctors.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #48 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:19

    
"But as long as we're crushing our digital hopes - one of the the
longest standing of these hopes is that digital can somehow encode
that granddaddy of legacy systems, our brains, and move our perceptions
and memories and emotions onto new platforms -- perhaps even
immortality on a chip, not the best place to be immmortal, but still
maybe better for some. That digital (back to the medicine thing) create
much better prosthesis for damaged limbs or even nerve tissue. Is this
another SF delusion or is the distance actually closing."

*Messing around with nerve tissue: distances closing

*Building digital prosthetics that sense and react to human nerve
signals: chugging right along

*Migrating human brains onto a computer network: about as likely as
migrating human brains onto plankton.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #49 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:34

    
>*Migrating human brains onto a computer network: about as likely as
migrating human brains onto plankton.

Not human brains, human memories/personalities/identities. Been a
staple of science fiction in one state or form forever. Where's the
impossibility?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #50 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:36

    
(Responding on participatory medicine... and music!)

"Obviously there are some positives to that situation, but it's
disingenuous  to think that it's (a) technically inevitable or (b) it
serves the interests of democracy."

It's related to what some call "democratization of knowledge," though
the d-world is always problematic because it can mean different things
to different people. "Participatory" is a useable term, I think - it
just suggests that there is more involvement. Traditionally patients
have been passive recipients of "care" or "treatments," and they
couldn't be much else because there was so much they didn't know. Now
patients can have access to medical knowledge that, before, was buried
in medical texts. Of course this has downsides. Most patients don't
have the physician's understanding, which is based on a lot of training
and a particular context for knowledge. However in many cases patients
are picking up a lot of focused knowledge about their specific
conditions, and given that intense focus (it's their body, after all),
they'll sometimes know more about some aspects of their conditions than
the doctors who're treating them. And they'll know their own bodies.

"If patients end up doing their own diagnoses by aggregating patient
data, using Web 2.0 style collective intelligence, and especially if
they then start suing doctors who make demonstrable, dumb mistakes,
the practice of medicine will be wrecked. Not improved, wrecked."

Patients already do their own diagnoses - *all the time* - and they're
constantly suing doctors for malpractice. That's not a change, but
it's also not what participatory medicine is about. It's about patients
having an informed and active, rather than uninformed and passive,
role in their treatment. It seems to work well. I'm part of a group
that founded a Journal of Participatory Medicine (http://jopm.org) to
gather research and evidence to develop an understanding of how, and
how well, it works. This absolutely doesn't mean the patients take
over, self-diagnose, perform their own surgeries, etc. 

"It'll be hugely damaged, in the same way that the music business was
damaged by Napster, and newspapers were wrecked by Craigslist, or the
Democratic Party was outmaneuvered and tamed by some Chicago guy who
had social media and a digital fundraising machine."

I don't think Napster hurt the music business, though P2P might be
damaging some parts of the business. The artists are finding a new
model, where they make more of their money from performance. They're no
longer fiefs in thrall to music companies that fund their recordings
and tours and take pretty much everything they make, with few
exceptions. Sure, some people have lost jobs over this, and some very
rich people are less rich… and the music business is transformed, maybe
for the better, overall. Nothing's permanent, and the Internet and
digital convergence are changing things fast… some for better, some for
the worse. What's the alternative?

"Doctors are keenly jealous of their pre-eminence.  They spent hard
years in med school, unlike Joe Keyboard.  Doctors also earn much,
much more money than they would if arteriosclerosis was re-defined as
some kind of hardware problem to be scanned by an iPhone app."

If we could heal everybody with technology, the doctors would be out
of work, for sure. So if that killer healing app appeared, would you
want to suppress it so that doctors could hang in?  

I don't think anybody expects medical intervention to be free, and it
will almost certainly be necessary for most of us. The real point of
participatory medicine is to make it better - to make US better. We'd
still be paying doctors and nurses and hospitals to do what they do
(though hopefully it'll be more affordable).
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #51 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:45

    
>If we could heal everybody with technology, the doctors would be out
of work, for sure. So if that killer healing app appeared, would you
want to suppress it so that doctors could hang in?  

Technology doesn't heal people. Doctors use technology to heal people.
That's how it's worked for as long as humans have been humans, and I
don't see anything that can or should change it, and (as I've said) the
loudest argument against 'participatory medicine' are the tv ads
encouraging people to participate in asking their doctor for
imbeciledumbostatin
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #52 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:47

    
"Havel talks a lot about the dangers of technocratic government in
this book.  Of handing over politics to well-trained experts who know
what they are doing and can prove it.  I happen to favor technocracy in
politics because I think politics ought to be dull, and business
should be rather dull too,  while efforts like science and the arts
ought to have all the vibrancy.  But after reading Havel's warnings
about the crimping and demeaning effect this has, the loss of a sense
of purpose, I'm troubled."

That word I used with medicine - "participatory" - occurs to me here.

It's good to have capable managers running government, administering
government affairs and making sure everything works as it should, going
for the best result. These are bureaucrats - they're staff - but it
shouldn't be their job to decide, at a high level, what they should be
doing. That's driven my people who legislate and people who execute -
politicians and statesmen who are ideally responsive to the popular
will. They're most responsive to the people they hear and see, which is
usually not John Q. Citizen, but Leticia Lobbyist. If we can have
better participation, and especially if we can get the real passions of
the people pumped into the legislative process - won't that balance
the "crimping and demeaning effect" you mention?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #53 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:47

    
I am thinking a lot about industrialization right now, because I am
busily teaching a bunch of outsourcers in the Philippines how to index
periodicals. I am turning a hundred-year old craft into an industrial
process that can be done by cheap, high-turnover workers anywhere. It
is really horrible and I will probably get laid off when I'm done, but
it is giving me things to think about.

It seems to me that what we have to do is to industrialize medicine
and teaching, two things that are done now as crafts, poorly, and at
great expense. We need inexpensive medical technicians doing the same
exact tests, procedures, and protocols over and over, exactly the same
way each time, with the speed and perfection of incessant practice.
Break the work into parts; analyze the parts into steps; train people
to do those steps quickly and perfectly: that's our trick. 

Similarly, we need is not only a national curriculum and standardized
testing, but uniform lesson plans for each teacher each day. The lesson
plans needn't be compulsory; making some lesson plan or other
compulsory would do the job. Making lesson plans is far and away the
hardest part of a teacher's job. Most of them would use the available
plans most of the time.

I don't see any way around this. We can't have a bunch of half-shamans
wandering around at work as if they were in the middle ages in the
middle of a industrial society, sucking huge amounts of money out of
the system in return for doing a moderately poor job. We aren't rich
anymore. We can't afford to be inefficient.

This seems like the only thing to do, and it seems like there is no
way in the world people could be gotten to do it. Could it happen? If
so, where, when, how?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #54 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:56

    
Stet - I said "if" for a reason. Of course there won't be a "killer
healing app," I posited that for the sake of argument.

To your other point, ads on television are not participatory medicine.
In fact, they're a goofy idea, though they probably work to sell
pills. Hearing about something and asking your doctor about it is not
participating in your care and treatment - you're still passive and
uninformed in that process.

If you saw the ad, then studied the treatment it mentions against
other treatments, assessing potential upsides and downsides, side
effects, etc., then discussed it with your physician in an informed way
as a possible treatment choice, that would be closer to participatory
medicine.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #55 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 11:58

    
*ICON magazine just sent me email saying that they accidentally put
chunks of issue #80 online before the release of their print edition. 
You know, it's that story I put in the State of the World discussion
here.

*They discovered their error, and hastily removed the material, except
for my little story there.  Online for mere hours, it promptly got
thousands of hits after Google spidered it and then the link got
Twittered.  So ICON, rather sheepishly, decided to leave the story up.
It's still there, with no other parts of a magazine around it.  Kind of
a loss-leader now.

http://bit.ly/8RRbsZ

*Okay, likely some mild, unsought web publicity for the mag from this 
mishap.  No big deal.  But better leave it there.  Right?   Why risk
probable WORSE publicity when random ornery geeks are clicking on a
dead link and it's like: "Hey!  Upscale British architecture print
magazine!   Where's that free stuff?  We never forgive!  We never
forget!  Expect us!"

*Here's a supposedly slyer architecture mag from Holland, where they
put a full story of mine online, let it soak up some hits, then cut the
dot-pdf in half. They baldly tell you that you have to buy the print
magazine if you want to read the rest of it.  But, I rather imagine
that issue's sold out by now.  So, if you stumble-upon this story while
websurfing, you can blithely read half of it and then suffer the
irritation.

http://www.sunarchitecture.nl/upload/49d601a8ba4b25.51434338.pdf

*Are either, or really any, of these schemes working for print media? 
No.  Why?  Because a magazine on the web isn't a magazine on the web. 
It's a piece of the web that is shaped like a magazine, and tries to
maintain magazine-like customs, functions and expectations.  And, like,
why.  Why do that?  It sort of worked when the Web was a series of
static non-refreshing web pages, but now it's about as likely as trying
to cram a glossy mag onto the WELL. 

It's not that print's a medium, and the web's a medium, and you get to
migrate between media.  The Web is a metamedium that turns everything
it grips into network-culture.

*So it's easy to see that mags are in for it.  What's a little harder
is looking at the hollow shell of your once-favorite antique shop and
realizing that's all about eBay.  "Gee, I'm on the web all the time
now... time for a stroll, it's a sunny day... Gosh, my neighborhood's
full of spooky holes."  Gothic High-Tech.

*Oh, but that's not all.  Wanna see some "Favela Chic?"  Cool Chinese
piracy of a Bruce Sterling story.

http://www.docin.com/p-34476299.html
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #56 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 12:05

    
>We need inexpensive medical technicians doing the same
exact tests, procedures, and protocols over and over, exactly the same
way each time, with the speed and perfection of incessant practice.

That's done now. The medical problem is interpreting the tests with
respect to the individual patient presenting, and that is not trivial.
The human with stethoscope desperately needs all the help she can get
to understand the meaning of the tests - how the result of test 25B
five years ago sheds light on the results of test 1097 from last year
and the new images that she just received. She has fifteen minutes to
figure this out, and then it's time for another patient.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #57 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 12:08

    
>If you saw the ad, then studied the treatment it mentions against
other treatments, assessing potential upsides and downsides, side
effects, etc., then discussed it with your physician in an informed
way
as a possible treatment choice, that would be closer to participatory
medicine.

Except how informed can most people be? They're going on the basis of
popularized summaries posted on the Internet. They don't know basic
physiology, chemistry, immunology or genomics, though they convince
themselves they do. Sure, research can come up with good questions to
ask a doctor, if the patient researcher is smart and well informed to
begin with. Otherwise - ask any doctor for horror stories on this
subject.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #58 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 12:15

    
Participatory medicine and the print media. Check this out:

http://www.foliomag.com/2009/2009-year-magazines

"Time’s most recent average weekly circulation is somewhere around 3.4
million (the POTY edition is almost certainly substantially more). 
That’s down 17% from 5 years ago but is still an impressive number. 
Plus, as Time Inc.’s media kits are at pains to remind you, a general
interest publication like this also has a substantial amount of
“pass-on” readership (think of all those doctor’s office waiting rooms,
for example).

"So who’s advertising? Turns out that the #1 type of space being
bought, by far, isn’t really advertising at all.  It’s prescription
drug legal disclosures.  Yup: 21% of Time’s Person of the Year ad pages
was taken up by those comforting warnings about “suicidal thoughts or
tendencies” or “increased risk of heart attack or stroke”. On average,
there were 1.4 pages of text disclosures for each page of health ads
that contained a photograph.

"All-told, health advertising comprised 40% of total ad pages for 14
prescription drugs and 3 OTC ones.  The biggest spender was
AstraZeneca, whose Seroquel medication for bipolar depression contained
a whopping 5 pages of disclaimers to accompany the one color photo of
a very sad-looking lady sitting on a concrete step. (side note: I just
saw one of their TV ads for the same medication, and the
contraindications and warnings droned on so long that it felt like I
was watching a 30 min. infomercial)..."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #59 of 223: Michael Heap (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 12:29

    
From Michael Heap, submitted via email:

Bruce - on a slight left of field tangent - how do you see hope (the
emotion not the hacker conference) rolling out over the next year as
the key to meaningful change.

to my eyes (yes im still sat in a middle eastern gas/petro-chemical
microstate propping up old media) at the moment im plugged into the
green movement across the gulf as the current regime flails around
trying to deal with the new younger genoration demanding change. one
thing in the last 6 months ive noticed is the hope in the young iranian
populace is very very strong, despite the backlash of the regeime
(maybe i should put it because of the regeime - they have something to
push against).

what i find utterly facinating is the change the young ones want - its
not the shiny western democratic ideals sold by the west - they seem
intent on rejecting those - its to forge their own newly minted islamic
based liberalism looking back to the pre-shah iran.

With iran headed in one direction, turkey heads another from
liberalism toward a stricter interpretation of islam, the introduction
of veil for women and a rejection of western values, again acompanied
with hope of a new turkey.

is hope for change (again backed up by actions by those who can change
- ie the youth) the way forward, by those who are disenfranchised to
re-build their societys?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #60 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 12:45

    
Stet: "Except how informed can most people be? They're going on the
basis of popularized summaries posted on the Internet. They don't know
basic physiology, chemistry, immunology or genomics, though they
convince themselves they do. Sure, research can come up with good
questions to ask a doctor, if the patient researcher is smart and well
informed to begin with. Otherwise - ask any doctor for horror stories
on this subject."

I think you make several unfortunate assumptions:

- That "most people" can't be informed enough to have active input
into their own medical treatment.

- That without a physician's knowledge and training, patients can't
have useful knowledge, background, or input.

- That patients inherently assume they know more than they do.

Those aren't necessarily correct assumptions, and I'd like to hear
some of the "horror stories" - the worst I've heard is that patients
sometime misinterpret what the  read online and it takes a few extra
minutes of the doctor's time to explain something.

In fact, many of the strongest advocates for participatory medicine
are physicians who really want patients that are better informed and
can be peers within the process of treatment.

It's not just about having patients be more involved, though. Check
out the definition of Participatory Medicine: 

"Participatory medicine is a model of medical care, based on the
development of a team that includes the patient (often referred to as
an e-patient), patient groups & specialized social networks, the entire
care team, and clinical researchers in a collaborative relationship.
It requires equal access to all the data and equal rights in the
decision making process, based on all the data available, the
information gathered and the collective wisdom of peer social networks.
It is based on the understanding that optimally treating an individual
patient suffering from a complex medical condition is often beyond any
single individual's ability."

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Participatory_medicine
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #61 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 13:02

    
>*Migrating human brains onto a computer network: about as likely as
migrating human brains onto plankton.

Not human brains, human memories/personalities/identities. Been a
staple of science fiction in one state or form forever. Where's the
impossibility?

*Science fiction adores impossible stuff.  Time machines, faster than
light starships, androids you can marry, artificial intelligences.
Those are sci-fi staples specifically because they're not practical,
and they  don't or can't really exist.

*If there were flying cars around (and we could drive them without
murdering a hundred times the number we already kill on nice flat
highways) then they wouldn't be science fiction.  Science fiction is
particularly enamoured of stuff that can be made to sound plausible,
and yet can't be dragged into popular use.  That way it keeps its
sci-fi gloss and remains in the genre instead of in the business pages.

*That said, let's consider a platform suitable for downloading a human
personality.  I don't think that machine is remotely likely, because
the brain is not a dry, crisp network of logic circuits. The brain is a
big bloody multicellular gland full of rushing liquids and hormonal
goo.  But even assuming there was such a platform, and that it worked,
nobody would hold it still to put human brains on it.  Society wouldn't
be able to get there from here.

*The thing's capacities for other purposes would be colossal.  There'd
be whole hosts of industries and applications exploding out of a
platform like that.  If a thing like that were real, we wouldn't even
bother to have "brains." We'd be pulling out the chunks of wet tissue
and plugging in new stuff that really worked.  Our human
"personalities" wouldn't be personalities.  We would no longer be
remotely human, not a bit of it.  The whole idea of doing such a thing
would seem like a phantom from a vanished age.

*The first guy who used that augment to become President, or make a
billion dollars, would throw the whole scheme into a cocked hat.  Tech
development there would turn into a wild scramble over the issues that
really interest us, self-realization, esteem, love, belonging,
security, meeting our everyday needs. 

*Nothing so wrong with that, but the impossibility gets worse. The
path of technical development required to create a brain-downloading
device would completely transform society.  If we had some humble
gadget fit to hold a mouse brain, it would be so powerful that it would
mean the end of most every custom, institution, ethical system,
philosophy, ideology, everything we know.  We'd be entirely busy
haplessly adjusting to the spinoff apps.  We'd forget all about
conserving brains.

*There are situations that are easy to dramatize, or that are
romantically attractive for philosophical reasons.  "Things that are
good to think," mind-stretching things.  Then there's actual technology
as it is deployed by actual societies.  The relations of society and
technology are very deep, intimate, cultural relations.  Nobody
understands them. Nobody.  

*Science fiction is written to entertain people. The Rapture of the
Geeks is there to help geeks deal with their buried transcendant
impulses and their will-to-power.  The technosocial thing that is
really going on, it is wet and deep and colloidal and infectious...
intimate, domestic... rapturous and paranoid, even.  
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #62 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 10 13:13

    
"Hope."  A big issue.  You know, I'm going to bow to the Maestro in
that one.

Even a purely moral act that has no hope of any immediate and visible
political effect can gradually and indirectly, over time, gain in
political significance. 
Vaclav Havel 

Hope is a feeling that life and work have meaning. You either have it
or you don't, regardless of the state of the world that surrounds you. 
Vaclav Havel 

Hope is a state of mind, not of the world. Hope, in this deep and
powerful sense, is not the same as joy that things are going well, or
willingness to invest in enterprises that are obviously heading for
success, but rather an ability to work for something because it is
good. 
Vaclav Havel 

Hope is definitely not the same thing as optimism. It is not the
conviction that something will turn out well, but the certainty that
something makes sense, regardless of how it turns out. 
Vaclav Havel 

Hope is not the conviction that something will turn out well but the
certainty that something makes sense, regardless of how it turns out. 
Vaclav Havel  (((He kept working on that one.  That's the one I really
like.)))

I really do inhabit a system in which words are capable of shaking the
entire structure of government, where words can prove mightier than
ten military divisions. 
Vaclav Havel 

I think theatre should always be somewhat suspect. 
Vaclav Havel (((Another particular favorite.  He's a literary man, our
Vaclav.)))

If we are to change our world view, images have to change. The artist
now has a very important job to do. He's not a little peripheral figure
entertaining rich people, he's really needed. 
Vaclav Havel (((He's really needed, and then he shows up with a bunch
of morose wisecracks, and, also, he's bipolar and drunk.  Plus, his
publisher is broke.  There's always hope, though!  Come on!)))

Isn't it the moment of most profound doubt that gives birth to new
certainties? Perhaps hopelessness is the very soil that nourishes human
hope; perhaps one could never find sense in life without first
experiencing its absurdity. 
Vaclav Havel (((Explains why the Czechs made him President. For 15
years!)))

Just as the constant increase of entropy is the basic law of the
universe, so it is the basic law of life to be ever more highly
structured and to struggle against entropy. 
Vaclav Havel (((the physics fan, or rather, the metaphysics fan)))

Lying can never save us from another lie. 
Vaclav Havel 

Modern man must descend the spiral of his own absurdity to the lowest
point; only then can he look beyond it. It is obviously impossible to
get around it, jump over it, or simply avoid it. 
Vaclav Havel 

None of us know all the potentialities that slumber in the spirit of
the population, or all the ways in which that population can surprise
us when there is the right interplay of events. 
Vaclav Havel 

Sometimes I wonder if suicides aren't in fact sad guardians of the
meaning of life. 
Vaclav Havel (((Absurdists, however, live to be 74 and counting
despite missing part of a lung)))

The attempt to devote oneself to literature alone is a most deceptive
thing, and often, paradoxically, it is literature that suffers for it. 
Vaclav Havel (((More great advice to take to heart.)))

The deeper the experience of an absence of meaning - in other words,
of absurdity - the more energetically meaning is sought. 
Vaclav Havel 

The exercise of power is determined by thousands of interactions
between the world of the powerful and that of the powerless, all the
more so because these worlds are never divided by a sharp line:
everyone has a small part of himself in both. 
Vaclav Havel 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #63 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 13:39

    
transfer personality to chips? we aren't talking about something that
we know is impossible.

>I don't think that machine is remotely likely, because the brain is
not a dry, crisp network of logic circuits. The brain is a
big bloody multicellular gland full of rushing liquids and hormonal
goo.  
Which supports a neural system with an enormous number of
interconnected neurons linked in enormously complex patterns - 10 to
the 11th  neurons. Each neuron is connected to about 1000 other
neurons, creating the staggering total of 10 to the 15  active
interconnections. 

The neurons talk to each other in a time-based pulse code, which is
now well on the way to being decoded. We can model the network
digitially. Sure, it's complicated. What do we have more important to
understand. 

>v*The thing's capacities for other purposes would be colossal. 
There'd be whole hosts of industries and applications exploding out of
a platform like that.  If a thing like that were real, we wouldn't even
bother to have "brains." 

Except what do 'we' have that's more important to "us" than potential
immortality?

>We'd be pulling out the chunks of wet tissue and plugging in new
stuff that really worked.  Our human "personalities" wouldn't be
personalities.  We would no longer be remotely human, not a bit of it. 
The whole idea of doing such a thing would seem like a phantom from a
vanished age.

Sure, we wouldn't be in Kansas anymore. but again, that doesn't make
the idea impossible. 
 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #64 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 15:01

    
>I think you make several unfortunate assumptions:
- That "most people" can't be informed enough to have active input
into their own medical treatment.

Input, sure. But, if it's so straightforward, why does the medical
profession exist, and has existed for so long? Because the Internet is
a new invention?? The practice of medicine is a tangle of extremely
detailed technical information, detective ability, memory and (often)
physical skill. Patients can help doctors by keeping good track of
their lives. 

- That without a physician's knowledge and training, patients can't
have useful knowledge, background, or input.
This is an overstatement. But, again, if this doctor stuff is
overestimated in terms of how tough it is, why stop with your own case?
Why not help your neighbors, maybe pick up a few bucks. The laws
against this are wrong and shortsighted and outdated?

- That patients inherently assume they know more than they do.
Not always. Many do. People continually do this in all kinds of areas
- read any political blog about climate change to see it in action.
Vaccination rumors and bogus autism pathology are other examples. 

>and I'd like to hear some of the "horror stories" - the worst I've
heard is that patients sometime misinterpret what the  read online and
it takes a few extra minutes of the doctor's time to explain something.

See above. Not explain, have to argue with a patient, or, much worse,
a patient's parent, about biology 101. Or parents going off to
quackland.  


>It requires equal access to all the data and equal rights in the
decision making process, based on all the data available, the
information gathered and the collective wisdom of peer social
networks.
>It is based on the understanding that optimally treating an
individual
patient suffering from a complex medical condition is often beyond any
single individual's ability."

And that's why a complex medical condition is often handled by a
collaboration of two, three or even more specialists. Sure, some
patients can add insight. Not all, though, and I can't imagine making
it compulsory for doctors.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #65 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 15:07

    
The juxtaposition of the Havel quotes with the "consciousness in a
box" concept makes me think of those famous fishbowl heads in Futurama.
Very handy, access to all those brains, held immortal on hand.

I hate to say that anything is impossible, but I agree with Bruce,
storing consciousness somewhere outside the body is about as unlikely
as it gets. James Cameron's "Avatar" depends on this concept - we've
seen it so many times in so many variations that we don't blink, we
suspend disbelief readily. As Bruce says above, science fiction often
makes the unreal seem real, the impossible seem possible. The
occasional accuracy of sci-fi predictions lends even more credibility
to science fiction's devices and imaginings.

We don't even know what consciousness is, or where exactly the sense
of the bounded self emerges... it's fluid and volatile and complex. How
would you know what to move where? And how would it be the same, once
moved? When you move data, the operation is that you copy it, and
delete the original. In moving "heart and soul," what might be lost in
the translation? How do you translate organically emerging awareness
into ones and zeroes?

This makes me think about the technological singularity and the
concept of the superintelligent machine. Bruce, have you seen anything
in your travels to suggest that, as Kurzweil says, "the singularity is
near"?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #66 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 15:22

    
To stet's latest:

"Input, sure. But, if it's so straightforward, why does the medical
profession exist, and has existed for so long? Because the Internet is
a new invention?? The practice of medicine is a tangle of extremely
detailed technical information, detective ability, memory and (often)
physical skill. Patients can help doctors by keeping good track of
their lives."

I don't disagree with any of that, but I'm not sure how it relates to
what I was saying, or your respone? I didn't say anything was
straightforward, or that the medical profession shouldn't exist, or
that medicine was not complex. We don't seem to be having the same
conversation.

(I said that stet implied...) "- That without a physician's knowledge
and training, patients can't have useful knowledge, background, or
input."

(stet responds:)

"This is an overstatement. But, again, if this doctor stuff is
overestimated in terms of how tough it is, why stop with your own
case? Why not help your neighbors, maybe pick up a few bucks. The laws
against this are wrong and shortsighted and outdated?"

Again, you're speaking to a conversation I wasn't having... and I
don't think it was an overstatement of what you said, but you know
better than I what you were thinking.

Nobody said that "this doctor stuff is overestimated in terms of how
tough it is." Furthermore, the concept of the e-patient is not, as I
think I said earlier, about replacing the doctor with the patient. It's
about the patient, doctor, and others in the system peering and
working together. And certainly nobody suggested that anyone can and
should practice medicine anywhere. I can't see where you're getting
that, frankly.

(I said...)
"- That patients inherently assume they know more than they do."

Stet responds:
"Not always. Many do. People continually do this in all kinds of areas
- read any political blog about climate change to see it in action.
Vaccination rumors and bogus autism pathology are other examples."

So we agree that it's not inherent. In fact, I think it's unusual in
the doctor/patient relationship. I doubt that we can prove your
contention or mind, however - not sure where we'd find the data.

(I said...)
">and I'd like to hear some of the "horror stories" - the worst I've
heard is that patients sometime misinterpret what the  read online and
it takes a few extra minutes of the doctor's time to explain
something."

(stet responds:)
"See above. Not explain, have to argue with a patient, or, much worse,
a patient's parent, about biology 101. Or parents going off to
quackland."

I'm sure that can happen. Again, probably rare. Again, hard to prove
one way or the other.

I don't think we're going to agree, so we should probably end this or
take it elsewhere.


>It requires equal access to all the data and equal rights in the
decision making process, based on all the data available, the
information gathered and the collective wisdom of peer social
networks.
>It is based on the understanding that optimally treating an
individual
patient suffering from a complex medical condition is often beyond any
single individual's ability."

And that's why a complex medical condition is often handled by a
collaboration of two, three or even more specialists. Sure, some
patients can add insight. Not all, though, and I can't imagine making
it compulsory for doctors.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #67 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 17:36

    
>We don't even know what consciousness is, or where exactly the sense
of the bounded self emerges... 
not yet, but the work of Shannon got us closer.

>it's fluid and volatile and complex. How
would you know what to move where? And how would it be the same, once
moved? 
If it's zeros and ones, you know it's the same. That's what Shannon
got.


When you move data, the operation is that you copy it, and
delete the original. 
not necessarily

In moving "heart and soul," what might be lost in
the translation?
don't know till we've tried, do we?

> How do you translate organically emerging awareness
into ones and zeroes?
We don't know yet. Does that mean it can't be done?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #68 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 10 18:25

    
"jonl: How would you know what to move where? And how would it be the
same, once moved?
 
"stet: If it's zeros and ones, you know it's the same. That's what
Shannon got."

So human consciousness can be manifest as zeroes and ones? Can you say
more about how that works?


"jonl: When you move data, the operation is that you copy it, and
delete the original.
 
"stet: not necessarily"

Okay, I'll bite - how else do you move data? If the original remains,
you've copied it. If the original goes away, it's been deleted. But I'm
not a computer scientist - I'm sure there's much I don't know about
data operations.

"jonl: How do you translate organically emerging awareness into ones
and zeroes?

"stet: We don't know yet. Does that mean it can't be done?"

Quite likely.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #69 of 223: bill braasch (bbraasch) Tue 5 Jan 10 18:57

    
I'm counting on the knowledge acquisition bottleneck to keep it just fuzzy
enough.  'this is a 1, but what does it mean?'
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #70 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 19:07

    
>"stet: If it's zeros and ones, you know it's the same. That's what
Shannon got."
So human consciousness can be manifest as zeroes and ones? Can you say
more about how that works?

It doesn't work yet. But consciousness is the product of
information-processing -- I mean, what else could it be. And if it's
information processing, it presumably could be digital, absent some
condition you can cite showing it can't - that's the Shannon
contribution.


"jonl: When you move data, the operation is that you copy it, and
delete the original.
 
"stet: not necessarily"

>Okay, I'll bite - how else do you move data? If the original remains,
you've copied it. If the original goes away, it's been deleted. 
You can copy and send it without deleting the original. Think of an
mpg file of "Ripple in Still Water" on your computer. You send it to
me. I have it, you still have it. Mine is identical to yours.


But I'm
not a computer scientist - I'm sure there's much I don't know about
data operations.
Please wiki "Claude Shannon."


"jonl: How do you translate organically emerging awareness into ones
and zeroes?

"stet: We don't know yet. Does that mean it can't be done?"

>Quite likely.
"I'm sure there's much I don't know about
data operations." but you think it's quite likely that it can't be
done. Maybe read a little before you decide what's quite likely and
what isn't.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #71 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Tue 5 Jan 10 19:08

    
>I'm counting on the knowledge acquisition bottleneck to keep it just
fuzzy enough.  'this is a 1, but what does it mean?'

ones and zeros don't mean anything. They are raw information, to be
transmitted perfectly using error coding. Meaning is in the mind of the
receiver after the message is complete. and one receiver's message is
another receiver's noise.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #72 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 6 Jan 10 01:27

    
Based on my experience with tech support, most people don't really
know how to write a bug report. I suspect that there are similar issues
with  doctors attempting to come up with a diagnosis based on vague
complaints. So it seems like one of the most important things we as
patients should be able to learn to do is to gather and record data
about ourselves. Instead of going in with a vague set of complaints,
how about doing some readings and publishing a dataset? Medical sensors
and diagnostics becoming much cheaper might lead to something.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #73 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 10 01:37

    
*Top ebooks pirated in 2009 by guys with electronic book readers. 
Man, that gadget-toting reader set is a weird crowd.

*Imagine the one guy who read all ten of these ebooks. Either that guy
is bi-curious or the hardware is owned by a married couple with some
real issues.

1. Kamasutra

2. Adobe Photoshop Secrets

3. The Complete Idiot's Guide to Amazing Sex

4. The Lost Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci

5. Solar House--A Guide for the Solar Designer

6. Before Pornography--Erotic Writing In Early Modern England

7. Twilight--Complete Series

8. How To Get Anyone To Say YES--The Science Of Influence

9. Nude Photography--The Art And The Craft

10. Fix It--How To Do All Those Little Repair Jobs Around The Home
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #74 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 10 01:48

    
*The brain thing is not gonna fly.  I mean, the notion's gonna hang
around because it's so romantically attractive, but it's not important.
 If it were genuinely important there would be a Cabinet officer in
charge of Brain Immortality, and some kind of Brain Immortality StartUp
Cluster, probably somewhere around Pittsburgh where they could hang
out with Hans Moravec.

*The idea is not formally and metaphysically impossible, but it's
impossible in the way that a shapely and obedient robot girlfriend from
the Stepford Wives Club is impossible.  There are plenty of
transhumanist geeks who wanna upload their brains, but they are vastly
outnumbered by lonely geeks who lack interpersonal skills and wanna get
laid by machinery.  That's an old scifi idea too, really old, as old
as Fritz Lang's METROPOLIS.  

*We've made some headfakes in that direction since.  YouTube's got
some awesome videos of foam-rubber Japanese chicks, and there are
inflatable dolls and even publicity stunts where geeks marry cartoon
characters.  But it would be wrong to say we're on some kind of
Singularity brink of inventing robot girlfriends.  The sci-fi
landscape's littered with 'em, and Terminator killer robot-boys too,
but they're stage props, not working technologies.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #75 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 10 02:29

    
I don't want this to turn into a Rapture of the Geeks lovefest here;
people who are into transhumanism are emotionally committed.  They're
not gonna be rationally argued out of their heartfelt desires, any more
than Creationists are gonna go kiss a chimpanzee on the lips and say
"Mom."

Metaphysical arguments are rarely settled.  They just get re-phrased
in subtler terms.  Time passes, and the debaters re-define victory.  
"Okay, I said 'Artificial Intelligence' in the 1960s,  but I really
meant 'Google.' Google is unhuman and really smart just like a 1960s
Hard-AI machine, so my ideas about intelligence and what could be done
with it were right all along." 

Well, no.  Because Google is a *collective* intelligence which is
collating what people are doing... but how boring to split hairs like
that!  Cool machines that know stuff!  We live in an age of wonders! 
Yeah man!

*But, well, look.  Human intelligence is not ones and zeros. No.  Ones
and zeros don't eat lunch.  You know when you skip lunch, and you get
kind of weak and cranky, and you can't think very well?  That's because
the brain is metabolizing a flow of chemical energy into the body,
chewing it, breaking it up with a huge gut system, and particles flow
into your bloodstream and *you think with that.*  That's you. Take that
away, and you die.

*You also have sensory input, you sleep and dream and have sex and get
exercise, and all these things profoundly affect the brain,
consciousness and the personality, and none of those phenomena are
about ones and zeros inside a "platform."

*If you take people and put them in a sensory-deprivation tank, where
it's just them and their cognitive platform, they start hallucinating. 
Rather promptly.  That's because there is no analytical ones-and-zeros
ghost in our heads that can be pulled out with a tea-strainer.  

*The brain's a gland.  Anatomically, the brain is quite like an ovary
or a testicle.  If you talked about the bit-streams and nerve networks
in your ovaries and testicles, people would immediately sense that
there was something fishy going on with your reasoning.  But if you
talk about consciousness and personality, you can immediately hide the
issue inside a long-accepted Descartian body-mind split.  

Even though -- mind you -- people with ovaries have feminine brains
and people with testicles have masculine brains.  Would you really like
to have a de-masculinized, de-sexed brain?  Isn't gender something
that has rather a lot to do with our "personalities"?  You don't get
gender behaviors without gender glands.

*So, let's say you fully mimic your testicle.  Scan it with the same
techniques as the brain scan. There it is: testicle on a chip, with an
operating system, thank you Microsoft Windows XXXVII.  Are you gonna
have children with that scan?  Is that, in any formal or pragmatic
sense, really a testicle?  It's your model of a testicle, made through
a certain device and encoded in certain ways.  Would you expect it to
behave exactly like a testicle? If you kick it does it howl, if you cut
it does it bleed?  Is it going to go through puberty and viropause,
developing in the way that testicles actually develop?  No.  It's a
medical model of a testicle, so to claim that it's actually "your
testicle" is a category error.

*The same would be true, except much more so, of your human
personality on a chip.  There would be a program on a chip, but it
wouldn't behave remotely like a human personality.  You'd need, really,
to scan not just a handy testicle, but a whole functioning body. 
Adrenal glands, heartbeat, meals.... Skin, eyelids, eyes, retinas... 
Sleep, dreaming... Some sex is generally considered a good idea...  So
you'd better model somebody else on your chip too, plus a home...
children... some rich sensory input, reruns of THE HONEYMOONERS,
tortilla chips, whatever... 

Kinda piling Pelion upon Ossa there, and that's why the idea's not
credible.  IMAGINABLE, sure, popular, kinda, credible, not really.

Uploading's about as credible as going to heaven.  Tremendously
compelling idea.  Ancient.  Indestructible.  Irrefutable.  People
pretend to believe in heaven all the time, mind you.  Huge majorities
of people, even.  Tell somebody their Grandma's gone forever, she's
just ashes... they get really upset. They won't nod and agree just
because you present them with some overwhelming evidence.  

We already have a magic uploading site where there is no marriage or
giving in marriage (unless you're Moslem).  It's not much use to sit
down with someone and argue that the blue dome of Heaven isn't really a
dome, like we thought; that we've got instruments now and we can
pretty well tell now that there are no gates and angels up there, that
Jupiter isn't Jupiter and Saturn isn't Saturn.  

*Believers will just smile at you in sophisticated fashion and say,
well, that was just metaphorical... that life has no meaning
otherwise...  that they'd kill themselves if they were forced to think
like you think.

*You get used to that after a while. It's okay.  On to another
topic... Hittite conspiracies, color theory, trilobites, the manned
space program.  There's plenty of fish in the sea.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #76 of 223: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Wed 6 Jan 10 03:12

    
THere is a DARPA-funded project, multicenter study going on in which
mathematicians, physiologists, and computer scientists are trying to
digitize the hippocampus. The stated goal of the study is to create a
hippocampal prosthesis, which will replace lost memory and other
cognitive skills dependent on the hippocampus, especially learning.
They've dispensed with all the philosophizing and  figured out an
algorithm that accounts for the signal processing that takes place in
the hippocampus: given input A, what output B will the hippocampus will
produce? Turns out you can model this, with the help of a
supercomputer or two, with like 99 percent accuracy. (More accurate
than my hippocampus, that's for sure. )The algorithm, placed on
silicon, now mimics the rat hippocampus. Next trick is to get it into a
rat's de-hippocampized brain and see if it can remember its wife's
birthday. 

I'd tell yoy more but DARPA has an info embargo on this one. You can
see something for yourself at 

http://www.neural-prosthesis.com/
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #77 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Wed 6 Jan 10 06:35

    
From off-site reader, Julian Bond:

The rapture of the nerds discussion seems to be dropping into the usual top-
down vs bottom-up problems. If we study neurons, we can't see any mind; If
we study mind, we can't see what generates it. Perhaps we should all go back
and re-read about ant-hills in Godel, Escher, Bach. Viewed purely as an
engineering problem, uploading mind is fraught with issues. Let's say we
construct something with equivalent complexity to a human brain and somehow
work out how to set the initial conditions. Our current knowledge of chaos
and complexity theory suggests we have very little idea what it will do in
the first microsecond after turning it on and simply cannot know what it
will do a few seconds after. And all of that will also depend on the nature
of the inputs and sensors attached. As Bruce points out, this really ought
to include inputs from inside the "body" as well as outside if we are to
expect continued human-like behaviour of the system, except there is no
"body". Setting the initial conditions means destructively or preferably
non-destructively taking a snapshot and reading the state of a brain and we
have essentially no idea how to do that. But, some time in the next
10-100-1000-10k years I'd expect mankind to construct such a system with
equivalent complexity. And pondering what it might do seems an interesting
exercise. However, interesting as it might be, it doesn't feel like anything
we come up with in 2010 is going to have much relevance when it actually
happens.

Discussions here about health care feel horribly US-Centric to this Brit.
The UK is also going through a re-examination of health care and the issues
surrounding automation. Quite apart from the horrendous history of IT
failures, the big issues seem to be about centralised government run
databases with insufficient privacy controls than anything about better (or
worse) informed patients.

Rather than a retrospective of the previous decade or predictions of this
one, I've been thinking about what I would like to see in the near future,
no matter how impractical. A couple of the more prosaic involve Bruce to
some extent.

1) Amazon start a print on demand service and arrange deals with publishers
to obtain and/or digitise their back catalogue. What prompted this was
trying to obtain a copy of Islands in the Net.  As far as I can tell this is
out of print, which strikes me as absurd for an award winning book from
1988. It then turns out that almost all the missing books in my library of
cyberpunk are similarly out of print and essentially unobtainable. In 2010,
this is just wrong, isn't it? So what happens to all those thoughts wrapped
up in books that have been remaindered, pulped and are now locked up in
publishers back catalogues by agreements that were struck pre-internet?
Copyright term agreements are bad enough but when they result in work being
deliberately kept off the market, they really suck.

2) Cheap, Electric-Assist Bicycle kits. Islands in the Net reminded me of
Go-Motion, solar powered, electric assist, desert buggies. Well of course, I
want one! But more realistically, I want a cheap electric-assist bicycle
conversion kit. And perhaps a cheap solar and wind powered generator on the
garage roof to charge it. So off I go to research this and all I can find is
stuff that is way over-priced and way under-engineered from places like
Seattle or Marlborough, UK. Then I look on Alibaba and find 20,000 Chinese
suppliers who can ship 1000 off quantities to anywhere in the world. WTF!
How come Alibaba never turns up in google searches but eBay does? Woah,
there's a lot of food for thought in all that. From Google's inadvertent
cultural imperialism because it's algorithms think I'm not interested in
non-US/UK/english language sites. To disdain for the bicycle in large parts
of the world but adoration in others. To the shift in small scale
manufacturing from the West to the East. To questions about Chinese design
and quality control and how fast its improving and overtaking the west and
Japan. To the state sponsored pigopolies of infrastructure suppliers that
make small scale, local, power generation hard. To?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #78 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 10 06:38

    
Modeling some aspect of the brain with the intention of creating a
prosthesis might make sense. Not the same as transplanting
consciousness from wetware to hardware.

What's more interesting to me is the kind of practical cyborganics you
see in Bruce's Google example. Years ago, when Paco Nathan and I were
working FringeWare, we realized that we were cyborgs, in a sense -
technologically-enhanced humans. We didn't need implants, the
extensions could be external - like the very capable Macbook that's
extending my capabilities right now, as I tap keys and surf references.
To my right there's an iphone, a powerful multifaceted extension I
carry in my pocket wherever I go.

Bruce, there's much volatility in the climate change discussions these
days, maybe that's what we should address next. Copenhagen was a bust,
and in the U.S. (and only the U.S.), climate change deniers are
picking up steam, even as Arctic ice is melting and polar bears are
drinking warm Cokes. There's a kind of global political paralysis,
we're stalled as mean temperatures increase. Are we past the
possibility of mitigation? What do we do when we're stressed to the
point that air conditioners are exploding?

Meanwhile, for those of you who are not members of the WELL but want
to comment or ask a question, send email to inkwell@well.com. The
Inkwell team will post your messages here.

(Julian Bond's comment slipped in while I was typing this.)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #79 of 223: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Wed 6 Jan 10 07:44

    


>If we can have better participation, and especially if we can get the real
 passions of the people pumped into the legislative process - won't that
 balance the "crimping and demeaning effect" you mention?

Jon L., I think you've described the Tea Party Movement.  And look how much
that's contributing to making our system a better one.

The ideas about the potential for "participatory medicine" strike me as an
offshoot of techno-utopianism -- a belief that if the tools and structure
change for the better, human nature will follow.  This has been disproven
time and again.  But since the tools keep getting shinier and more complex
and, let's face it, a lot more fun, it's a lesson we keep relearning, some
of us.

These ideas need to be tested beyond the cozy echo chambers of like-minded
converts.  You might find that, much as the Tea Partiers can turn the
techniques of Alinsky-style organizing against the progressives, that
they've got a lot of potential for negative impact that you don't yet
perceive.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #80 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Wed 6 Jan 10 09:58

    
Wow! lots of very good posts. However, with all respect:

> If it were genuinely important there would be a Cabinet officer in
charge of Brain Immortality, and some kind of Brain Immortality
StartUp
Cluster, probably somewhere around Pittsburgh where they could hang
out with Hans Moravec.

"Genuinely important" and "possible with currently technology" aren't
remotely the same. I'm extremely familiar with the research cited by
<gberg> in <76>: the main researcher, Ted Berger,'s been decoding
hippocampus machine language for more than 30 years, which is about
state of the art. The trigger for the recently DARPA funding was him
definitiviely cracking the code, at least for rabbits: he has a chip
that can talk to hippocampuses in their own language, with startling
results. Basically, in a key experiment, when a chip was off, a rabbit
didn't display a conditioned reflect. When it is on, it did.

>The rapture of the nerds discussion seems to be dropping into the
usual top-down vs bottom-up problems. If we study neurons, we can't see
any mind; If we study mind, we can't see what generates it. 

And this is a statement of one of the oldest problems in philosophy,
the mind-body problem. We have matter and energy on the one hand; we
have minds on the other. Minds don't seem to be matter/energy in any
measurable or understandable way. But if they're something different,
how can they make matter and energy (for example, human bodies) do
things?  Philosophers have clanged their heads against this problem for
millennia. And not just philosophers: with the advent of Christianity,
the idea of soul (and the immortality of the soul) entered the
discussion - again, leading to the same mystery: what's the soul,
specifically, and how does it connect with body.

It's my thought that the work of Michigan native Claude Shannon )April
30, 1916 – February 24, 2001), offers insights to the resolution of
this mystery. Many scientists put him in the league of Archimedes,
Newton, and Einstein -- but most educated people don't know his name.
His contribution was actually defining 'information,'in terms of its
opposite, disorder or noise, and proving that it could be transmitted
or preserved not just well but perfectly, regardless of noise. His
papers setting this forth, published in 1948, created computers. (His
earlier paper, in the 30s had predicted digital computing).

Is personality information? Intuitively, it seems a lot closer to
information than to matter and energy; and we see it at work in
computers. 

[more 2 come]
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #81 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Wed 6 Jan 10 10:19

    
From offsite reader Stefan Jones:

bruces wrote: 
 
"The population *identifies* with vampires and zombies, wants to marry
them, settle down with them." 
 
Man, the *obvious* choice for a charismatic supernatural lifemate is a
werewolf, if only because he or she would be able to drag a haunch or
two of venison to your bunker when the moon is full. Although an
edge-city dweller like me would probably have to settle for an
were-urban-coyote who supplies bunnies and squirrels. 
 
* * * 
 
The Oughts were actually pretty good to me financially, but I don't
think I've felt more bummed by the apparent face of the future.
Including in the early 80s, when the whole nuclear holocaust / Mad Max
scenario seemed possible if not imminent. Outright stupidity, or at
least hard-boiled refusal to face the facts and challenges of our
times, seems utterly pervasive now a days. 
 
I find myself wondering if the best way to assure a good future for
myself is to find a way to scam the suckers, dupe the stupes, or
otherwise take advantage of fucktardery. Like a diet based on Little
Debbie snack cakes and Hot Pockets, or a multi-level marketing scheme
that sells discount carbon tax stamps to terrified SUV owners. Wrap a
flag around it and fake a plug by Glenn Beck and it's as good as gold.
 
Stefan 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #82 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 10 11:02

    
Emily -

"Jon L., I think you've described the Tea Party Movement.  And look
how much that's contributing to making our system a better one."

Not really what I as describing. Teabaggers and protesters in general
are not participating, they're just making noise and showing how they
feel rather than what they think, often orchestrated by some top-down
organization manufacturing an appearance that is supposed to suggest
popular will. The people who orchestrate those events are working the
emotions of the crowd. And emotional response is not informed
participation.

"The ideas about the potential for "participatory medicine" strike me
as an offshoot of techno-utopianism -- a belief that if the tools and
structure change for the better, human nature will follow."

Participatory medicine is definitely related to technology -
facilitated by access via networks to more information and to other
people who are dealing with similar issues. I don't see that there's
any expectation that human nature will change, not sure where you're
getting that. What changes is the role of the patient and her
relationship to the various healthcare providers in the context of
treatment. The goal is a more robust informatin change in all
directions, and better treatment. For example, a better informed
patient might be more sensitive to implications of various sensations
or physical manifestations that they might have overlooked if they
didn't have some sense how it relates to their condition - and they can
have better communication with a physician who's dropped the wall of
expertise so that the patient can feel comfortable talking, and the
doctor's really listening. This is really more social, more human, than
technical. I'm baffled how this fits any concept of the
"technoutopian."

"This has been disproven time and again.  But since the tools keep
getting shinier and more complex and, let's face it, a lot more fun,
it's a lesson we keep relearning, some of us."

All I can say is speak for yourself. I personally am suspicious of the
shiny object and complexity for its own sake.

"These ideas need to be tested beyond the cozy echo chambers of
like-minded converts.  You might find that, much as the Tea Partiers
can turn the techniques of Alinsky-style organizing against the
progressives, that they've got a lot of potential for negative impact
that you don't yet perceive."

Oh, I'm very aware of echo chambers and of the potential down side of
various emerging technologies, including those we're discussing. I
don't dismiss a technology because it has a down side, when there's
also a clearly discernible upside. What I think I'm hearing you say,
though, is that free speech is not such a great idea, and we should
suppress even limited democratic participation because "it has a
potential for negative impact" - people we disagree with might also
have voices. I mean, I hope that's not what you're saying, but I'm
having trouble reading it any other way. Sure, those pesky global
warming deniers would go away if we didn't give them so many channels
in which to rant and spew, but we were using the same channels to make
the point about climate change.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #83 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Wed 6 Jan 10 11:29

    
> Sure, those pesky global warming deniers would go away if we didn't
give them so many channels in which to rant and spew, but we were using
the same channels to make the point about climate change.

The problem is, bad money drives out good. Something written by a hack
that sounds sort of scientific and that reinforces prejudices and what
an audience wants to believe will be believed, no matter how
unscientific and wrong. Not saying that suppression is the answer, but
the problem is rooted in human nature. In the words of one of my
favorite writers, 'truth does not do as much good in the world as the
appeearance of truth does evil.'
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #84 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Wed 6 Jan 10 11:55

    
<80> continued:

I think we are a long way from current brain work (like that described
in <80> & <76> to understanding brains and consciousness. The process
is a building the tools to build the tools to build the tools, in which
we are many tools away. 

But I don't see the innate impossibility of, taking human
identity/personality/memory out of a brain and embedding it in either
another brain or electronics, or (most likely first) a hybrid of
electronics and cultured nerve tissue. What am I missing?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #85 of 223: Thomas Petersen (sushi101) Wed 6 Jan 10 14:31

    
Bruce

As always it's a great pleasure to read your thoughts, although I
don't agree with everything you say. Thanks for that.

I have a question that have been on my mind for a while now and would
like get get your opinion on.

Recently I wrote an essay about it called "Slaves of the feed - This
isn't the real time we've been looking for"

Here is an expert:

"...To get “signal” we need to plow through our noisy feeds to find
the gold-nuggets that are of importance to us.  Manual work by which
our lacking ability to consume more than one feed item at a time
becomes the bottleneck for how fast we can process and evaluate the
information. Something gotta give.

It’s clear that we need information because we orient ourselves more
and more through our online living. But it’s also quite obvious that
our natural ability to process the very information that we need, don’t
scale well.

The paradox we find ourselves in is that on one hand we don’t know
what we don’t know so it doesn’t really make sense to exclude any
sources of information.

On the other hand, much less than what we are forced to consume is
really of relevance but we only find out which after we have consumed
it.

In a world where time is one of the most precious resources this
doesn’t compute.

We need quality instead of quantity in our feeds. We need a better
ability to find the gold nuggets. But as some of you have probably
already asked yourself, what is quality? How can we know what is truly
of relevance? Thus we find ourselves in an unsettling scenario.
Designing for the bottleneck

In other words, the aggregators that we have are capable of harvesting
almost as much information as we want from them, but we have to
evaluate each piece of information, meaning that we have to design the
aggregators around the bottleneck. Meaning us.

There are attempts to solve this in order to create better quality
data streams. Wordburst algorithms that look for when words or
sentences suddenly start to peak within a short period of time, is one
example. Popularity of a given feed item might be a different approach.
But right now most of these algorithms don’t take the individual
interest-space into account. Instead they look at global trends and as
much as I believe that New Moon the movie is a great youth movie. I was
kind of hoping for New Moon the moon when I clicked on the tag in the
trend cloud.

We find ourselves in a situation where there is no shortage of
information in the digital space but only a very limited ability to
extract relevant information thus making us depending on so much manual
labor, one would be excused to think that slavery had in fact been
re-inserted..."

The rest can be found here 
http://000fff.org/slaves-of-the-feed-this-is-not-the-realtime-weve-been-lookin
g-for/

What I am really after is where is this addiction to information
leading us and what can we do to free ourselves of the reliance off the
feed. Perhaps these where some of the things that Stewart Brand talked
about too.

How do you see the whole subject of information and how we deal with
it? 

Not just twitter.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #86 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 10 17:05

    
"But I don't see the innate impossibility of, taking human
identity/personality/memory out of a brain and embedding it in either
another brain or electronics, or (most likely first) a hybrid of
electronics and cultured nerve tissue. What am I missing?"

What are you moving, exactly? What are its components? Where in the
brain do you find identity/personality/memory, and how do you move it
exactly as is to some other context or platform? 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #87 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Wed 6 Jan 10 17:19

    
>What are you moving, exactly? 
in words of one syllable, a soul.

>What are its components?
We have names for some: memory. sensation. cognition. 

>Where in the brain do you find identity/personality/memory, and how
do you move it exactly as is to some other context or platform? 
brain mapping has moved pretty far - that's a relatively easy part.
The 'exactly' is where the digital translation comes in. No, it is not
going to be easy. But impossible? Why?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #88 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 07:59

    
*So, I happen to be here in Milan for a day, so I did what I commonly
do when I want to check out Milan's moral temperature.  I went to the
Rinascente department store.

*The place is of particular interest to me because it's next to the
Duomo, right in the blast zone of the tourist trade, and yet the
Milanese themselves shop there.  So the Rinascente is a kind of
Milanese-glocal consumer paradise.  It's got what Milan offers the
world that the Milanese themselves are customarily willing to buy.

*So what's in there, you may wonder.  Fashionable clothes, mostly.
Milanese couture. Shoes, belts, raincoats, scarves, acres of incendiary
lingerie, Prada, Versace, Missoni, all the usual suspects.  If you're
into fashion-trendy, the Rinascente is kind of a one-stop
trend-spotting shop.

*So, you know: what's new for winter 2009/10? Well, shiny lightweight
quilted jackets for both men and women, oddly drapey and buttonless
gray sweaters, and weird toques that are made out of knitted tubes.

*But, you know, perhaps the genuinely new development is that I do go
to the Rinascente with great interest, and I'm keenly aware of the
seductive power of all these luxury European goods, and I very rarely
buy *anything.*  It doesn't even occur to me, frankly.  I paw over the
stuff, sometimes I even take notes.  I don't purchase anything.

*I'm like some kind of pest who goes to the racetrack to admire the
horses and never places a bet.  It's like being the Open Source guy at
the Apple store.  Sure, one appreciates the genius of Jobs and Ive,
but... pay money for that?  It's all smoke and mirrors; I gotta see
what's out on Sourceforge.

*I don't have the time for it.  I don't know where I'd put it.  So I
ogle it and I don't get any.  Maybe a notebook, a pen.  Sometimes I
have a coffee while I peoplewatch.

*The basement of the Rinascente is full of domestic industrial-design
product.  Huge. Beautifully packaged and displayed.  Totally
fascinating.  There's like Alessi and Droog and Moooi and Starck, guys
who are arch postmodernist designers doing design that's way out of the
box...  I'm like hefting this stuff, checking out the price points and
the manufacturing processes, looking at the labels on the bottom... Do
I take any of it home, the anthropomorphic salt-shakers, the
translucent plastic Louis XIV chairs? Nope.  Wouldn't dream of it.  I'm
down there occupying valuable floor space and sucking up oxygen.  From
the point of view of the Rinascente staff, I must be a drag on
business, but since I look pretty much like the paying foreign
customers, they can't grab me by the ear and throw me out.

*Rem Koolhaas said some time ago that, in the future, museums would
open stores while stores would curate their products.  I wonder if he
meant that people would go to stores, stare at things on the walls and
shelves, and never buy the stuff.  Retail stores are dying all over the
place; the USA has dead, weed-grown malls from coast to coast.

*Some of that is surely because the population is broke.  But at least
some of that has to be because some people in 2010 just aren't
consumers any more.  They're not dropouts or the Amish or thrifty on
principle, they just look at things that they should have grabbed
reflexively, used a week and stuffed in their garage, and the romance
is gone for them.  They just don't do it, they don't respond. 
Consumption is a lost art for them, like penmanship, square-dancing or
hog-hollerin'.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #89 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 08:11

    

One of the first things one notices about Milan is that they have a
dress code.  Actually, they have several different dress codes -- every
Milanese caste or class has a dress code.  But they all dress, and
they've been doing it for five hundred years.

I wish I understood how that started.  Presumably, there must have
been some hairy-eyed, half-barbarian, medieval Lombard guy, wrapped in 
the customary functional rags of the Dark Ages, and he must have put
down his axe or halberd or whatever, and figured:  "This just won't do.
 Instead of these Rome-smashing combat garments, I need something of
fine linen that's been tailored on the bias cut."  There doesn't seem
to be any compelling *reason or motive* for the Milanese to dress up so
hard.  But they do it; every foreigner who drops by can see it; they
even do it when they are being starved and bombed, and it's been that
way for centuries.

*They're not a rude people, although they're a big-city people with a
no-nonsense attitude, so it takes you a while, maybe a couple of weeks,
for you to realize you're hurting their feelings.  There you are, your
clothing is clean, properly zipped, considered acceptable in most
other places, international airports, whatever... but you're Not Okay. 
Mostly it's the shoes, which for the Milanese are almost never Okay,
but it's really the whole affect.  You're an alien; you haven't caught
on.  It's not exactly offensive, but you're outside the game.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #90 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Thu 7 Jan 10 08:23

    
>some people in 2010 just aren't consumers any more.  They're not
dropouts or the Amish or thrifty on principle, they just look at things
that they should have grabbed reflexively, used a week and stuffed in
their garage, and the romance is gone for them.  They just don't do it,
they don't respond. Consumption is a lost art for them, like
penmanship, square-dancing or hog-hollerin'.<


Avarice doesn't go away, at least not for any significant number of
people. If avarice has come detached from medium-sized objects you can
carry home and leave around the house, to what has it attached itself?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #91 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 08:24

    
As a non-Milanese, there at first seems to be little you can do about
this situation.  As a non-Milanese alien, you cannot really gain any
personal benefit from being fashionably dressed; it's a no-win
situation for you. They best you can hope for is that you stop hurting
the Milanese, stop throwing sand in their social gears and provoking
their inner anxiety, which never seems far from the surface.

*You can maneuver around within the caste system a little.

Stage 0. Hobo, backpacker, tourist slob:  subhuman
Stage 1. Properly dressed alien: subhuman
Stage 1-B.  Freak-scene alien: goth, metal dude, Krishna worshipper,
techno DJ, etc: freak
Stage 2. Actually wearing the same clothes as a normal Milanese,
because you went out and bought them: fraud, ringer
Stage 3. Dressing as a posh SuperMilanese because you are a model,
actress, foreign millionaire, etc: vaguely irritating.  May be formally
encouraged because it's good for business.

*So, given this reality, what to do?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #92 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 08:50

    
*You can't win, but sometimes you can lose in an interesting way.

*Ramp up the semiotics.  This means dressing in garments that might
conceivably be fashionable in Milan, but, in fact, aren't.  You have to
make the attentive gestures toward your appearance that the Milanese
customarily do, while purging any elements of your wardrobe that
identify you as a hick.  Because they can't place you instantly, the
Milanese will stare for three or four seconds... because they're
sensing, and properly fearing, that something has appeared on the
fashion radar that they haven't yet seen.

*Then they realize that you're just an alien.  But you're an alien
who's fronting.  That seems to be Okay.  In some sense, you're actually
dressed in Code Alien.  There are Japanese Gothic-Lolita types, mostly
18-25 demographic, who are in Milan and superb at this -- supremely
alien but somehow honorary Milanese, thanks to the extra fuss with the
pastel silk bows and the crimpy ankle-socks or whatever.  

*The rich Arabs, the Russians, the German housewives from Bremen, they
all get the eyeroll, but those Nipponese Code Alien girls... they get,
like, preferential seating on buses.

*In theory, it might be possible to push this further.  It would be
cruel and ungentlemanly, but a clever man or woman with bad intent
could hack the Milanese couture system.  I'd be guessing the most
effective method would be some kind of Milanese steampunk schtick --
attacking the modern-day Milanese by dressing in the garb of Milanese
from another time period.  

*For instance, kitting yourself out in full-scale Futuristi couture
from 1911, with the jagged, heart-stopping "abstract-dynamic" graphics.
 It's antique and futuristic at the same time.   Most Milanese
wouldn't recognize this century-old Futurist gear, but there's no way
they'd laugh at it, or find it funny or weird.  They'd know it was
Milanese all right, but they'd have to go into some kind of conceptual
overdrive in the effort to place it and respond properly... This might
take too many processing cycles and the whole system might crash.

*That would be a pity.  When I first saw the Milanese, many years ago,
I saw them as the Milanese, but nowadays I see them as people behaving
as Milanese.  I guess that's a subtle distinction, but somehow it
makes them endearing.  You end up really rooting for them somehow; you
want 'em to pick up the ol' soccer ball and run off with it into the
stands.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #93 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 08:58

    
Tomorrow morning I have to fly over to the Balkans, and it's snowing
on the European transport system.  If I don't show up for a couple of
days, send the Saint Bernards.

I see that the Eurostar is claustrophobically stuck in the bottom of
the Channel Tunnel again.  If I never encounter that particular travel
experience, I'll be a happy man.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #94 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 09:01

    
If you're low on hand-wringing, brow-wrinkling pundits, I suggest
chewing on this for a while. This piece is supposed to be coming across
all resilient and perky, but boy is it glum.   

http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/print/201001/american-decline

Rather a lot of stuff in there about California.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #95 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 10 09:17

    
*Uh-oh.  Send a LOT of Saint Bernards:


http://www.dailykos.com/story/2010/1/6/822520/-Freak-Current-Takes-Gulf-Stream
-to-Greenland
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #96 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Thu 7 Jan 10 10:11

    
That Gulf Stream to Greenland thing could be really bad news. Besides
cold Europe, melting Greenland icecap....
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #97 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Thu 7 Jan 10 10:15

    
There's a short version of the Fallows gloom to much the same effect
as an op-ed in today's LA Times by the always-cogent Orville Schell.

A ... tipping point has also been on my mind lately, and it's left me
no less melancholy. In this case, the threat is to my own country, the
United States. We Americans too seem to have passed a tipping point.
Like the glaciers of the high Himalaya, long-familiar aspects of our
nation are beginning to seem as if they are, in a sense, melting away.

<http://www.latimes.com/news/opinion/la-oe-schell7-2010jan07,0,7458460.story>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #98 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 10 16:20

    
Interesting about the Milanese. While they're trying on shoes,
sniffing the fresh leather, Austin's Alan Graham of Mobile Loaves and
Fishes is buying blankets for the homeless who're living on the streets
in a historic cold snap. (http://twitter.com/mlfnow) You can text a
blanket to a homeless person in Austin from anywhere in the world.

Last night I was rereading parts of "Shibuya Epiphany" in Howard
Rheingold's book _Smart Mobs_, written as SMS was just emerging as its
own kind of virtual world-builder. Cellular reality is a complex
evolving dimension of the emerging noosphere. Teilhard de Chardin would
be elated.

Tonight the cold, cold streets of Austin will be slow and quiet as
everyone watches football, the University of Texas vs Alabama, the BCS
championship game. I didn't know what the hell BCS was, not being a
persistent and attentive football fan. It stands for Bowl Championship 
Series, a selection process that I won't take time to get my head
around (because it's already too full). In matters of football, I'm
very Andy Griffith (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oNxLxTZHKM8), but
I'll be watching this game, caught up in the local enthusiasm.

However screwy the world may seem, we get on with our lives, shopping
and buying shoes, watching championship football games, posting short
bursts on Twitter and longer diatribes on our blogs, having meetings to
schedule more meetings, pondering the past, speculating about the
future, avoiding the present, arguing politics, flipping television
channels, dancing, shouting, bouncing, trying to carry a tune... We
just keep on.

Here on the WELL, Emily Gertz has been talking about her experience
covering the COP15 Copenhagen Summit. It's frustrating - we have a
critical problem that scientists generally understand... they know what
 we (as in everybody, globally) should be doing about it, but we can't
muster the political will to take comprehensive action. Copenhagen
produced a weak, non-binding,unenforceable agreement. Where do we go
from here?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #99 of 223: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 7 Jan 10 18:08

    
That Fallows piece is interesting.  He keeps saying "We're doing
great," but by the end the overall message is "stick a fork in us,
we're done."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #100 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Thu 7 Jan 10 19:23

    
Milan's a great place to buy stuff but beyond that...
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #101 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 10 20:14

    
From what I've read so far, Fallows seems to be saying that American
society is strong and resilient, but American government and politics
are a weird skanky mess, getting worse, probably beyond repair. I
agree; that relates to the point I've made about participation. It
seems to me that the only hope to make government functional is for
those outside government to be attentive, and for those who are both
passionate and knowledgeable to be plugged in... rather than deferring
responsibility to broken and dysfunctional political crankery. Sure,
there'll be obnoxious inputs - like the teabaggers, birthers, et al.
All the more reason for the rest of us to be fired up, vocal, engaged.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #102 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Fri 8 Jan 10 01:27

    
You also have to have a consensus that government isn't intrinsically
evil. 

The old Ronald Reagan line about "The nine most terrifying words in
the English language are, 'I'm from the government and I'm here to
help.'" was not funny in the context of (for example) Katrina - but it
keeps destroying ability to act on all kinds of pressing needs.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #103 of 223: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 8 Jan 10 05:20

    
I don't see how you can have a functional country without a functional
government.  Although to circle back a few posts, the Italians seem to
have been doing their best for generations.

Most seriously, though, what amounts to the nihilism of the
anti-government Reaganite right may well doom us to a societal
collapse.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #104 of 223: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 8 Jan 10 05:40

    
Of course, to give idiots their due, looking at the last few decades
of governance it's hard not to feel a bit of nihilism.   The nature of
American corruption has really changed.  Nixon ended up with a few
million, LBJ got his radio/tv empire, again pretty small potatoes. 
Eisenhower got a really swell retirement farm.  But we now have a
degree of connection between really major crooks and government that we
haven't seen in over 100 years.  Of course the irony is that those on
the far right don't understand that their own heroes are among the
worst, but they're not entirely wrong about the disease even if their
idea of a cure is nuts.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #105 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Fri 8 Jan 10 07:50

    
If the basic structure of government is wrong, public participation in
government will amount to many people busily turning a crank that
isn't attached to anything.

And, in the case of California, the basic structure of government is
wrong because a large segment of the public wanted it wrong. They did
participate: they broke the government. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #106 of 223: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 8 Jan 10 09:18

    
What you say is basically true.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #107 of 223: bill braasch (bbraasch) Fri 8 Jan 10 09:38

    
I remember a weekend when the CHP went on strike.  I've never seen cars go
so fast on the Bay Bridge.  One day of that and the strike was over, but
what a day we had.

On all levels it's a cat and mouse game.  We'd like not too many cats when
we're mousing around, not too many mice around our catbird seat.

Lenny Bruce has a riff in the Berkeley Concert on the invention of police.
"I was sleeping and I got a face full of crap!"  Next thing you know, we
gotta have a craphouse.
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http://popup.lala.com/popup/937030201816428413&ei=
KmxHS4SyDYjAsgOJ1t22Aw&sa=X&oi=music_play_track&resnum=2&ct=result&cd=2&ved=0C
AwQ0wQoATAA&usg=AFQjCNE0m6-8bR9p6OSjF2K07ajajopmXA>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #108 of 223: bill braasch (bbraasch) Fri 8 Jan 10 09:39

    
here's a shorter link to that
<http://popup.lala.com/popup/937030201816428413>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #109 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 8 Jan 10 13:47

    
"If anybody throws any crap on us while we are sleeping, they'll get
thrown in the craphouse." "But wait a minute... everybody? What if it's
my mother?" 

He gets a faceful of crap, and says wait a minute, I thought we had a
rule. And they tell him it's a religious holiday, and besides, if he's
going to be indecent and sleeping all day, he deserves a faceful of
crap.

Not too long before Lenny was gone, worn down by his battle for the
freedom to talk about the sort of things onstage that everybody was
doing and talking about, but not openly, not in public. Pretty minor
stuff compared to today's standup routines, but they busted him hard
for it.

Some would really like to reconstitute that oppressive era. They seem
rather quaint, today.

Bruce said he might be offline for a couple of days; we can carry on
without him til he's connected again, or until we form a search party.
Perhaps he's boldly gone where no man has gone before, into the
wormholes. While we wait, feel free to chime in with your own thoughts
about the state of the world.

There's something meaningful, I think, in the fact that Lost fans are
lobbying hard to have the U.S. State of the Union address rescheduled
so they can see the first episode of the last few. Priorities.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #110 of 223: Linda Castellani (castle) Fri 8 Jan 10 15:44

    

Perhaps they could consider TiVo?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #111 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 8 Jan 10 21:06

    
I think the idea is that the speech would preempt the episode and
delay it another week. And they've been waiting for MONTHS.

And it's probably more real to them than the State of the Union
address. Obama, after all, will address only one dimension of linear
time. He's going to talk about healthcare reform and putting people
back to work, pretty mundane topics, only whimper-level apocalyptic.
Lost fans are after the bang.

Appears it's sinking in with Obama that he can't afford to be cool. He
has to kick some ass with this address, so I personally think it'll be
more interesting than Lost, even if it is fairly fixed in time and
space.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #112 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 10 05:33

    
You can call off the Saint Bernards, I'm here in Belgrade.

Odd, springlike weather here as Arctic snow blankets Britain.  By
Belgrade standards, the town looks terrific. Never seen glum, crumbly
Beograd looking so perky.  It's like last month's dissolution of the
Schengen visa barrier set off a starting gun to turn a Slavic cyberpunk
dystopia into Euro-Disney.  

The population's much better-dressed, new stores are springing up
everywhere, the tabloids are full of harmless busty pin-up chicks and
tennis stars instead of the customary profiteers and war goons... Some
kind of major tourist-promotion effort also seems to be underway.  It's
busily emphasizing all the cuddliest, most Ruritanian aspects of
Serbian society, stuff like eco-tourism, ruined castles, hand-loomed
aprons and elfin leather shoes.

*Locals talk about "the crisis," but mere financial collapse seems
pretty small potatoes compared to the last 20 years of local daily
life.  If you're a 20 year old kid in Belgrade right now, it feels like
someone peeled back the drapes and threw open a window for the first
time in your life.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #113 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 10 06:54

    
That sounds cheery. Maybe we're drifting into the alternate universe
where Mr. Potter loses his bank and all his money, and is tossed into
prison with the likes of Bernie Madoff, while George Bailey creates a
cohousing co-op with an alternative currency and starts planting
community gardens and setting up windmills. And everybody's texting how
great life is, after all.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #114 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 10 10:04

    
I think we have a few discussions hanging, waiting for your filters to
kick in, so I won't bring anything else up at this point. I should
note that Obama assures "Lost" fans that he won't pre-empt their show,
so there's one global crisis averted.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #115 of 223: 4 days behind (satyr) Sat 9 Jan 10 11:23

    <hidden>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #116 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 10 13:02

    
Worldwatch Insititute has released a preview of State of the World
2010, which you can download for free: http://budurl.com/sow2010

"Amid this flurry of activity, one dimension of our environmental
dilemma remains largely neglected: its cultural roots. As consumerism
has taken root in culture upon culture over the past half-century, it
has become a powerful driver of the inexorable increase in demand for
resources and production of waste that marks our age. Of course,
environmental impacts on this scale would not be possible without an
unprecedented population explosion, rising affluence, and
breakthroughs in science and technology. But consumer cultures support—
and exaggerate—the other forces that have allowed human societies to
outgrow their environmental support systems."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #117 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 10 14:41

    
I enjoy reading Worldwatch, but I'm starting to wonder about the
culture of consumerism.  People who've never had any consumerism around
tend to take it to pretty well (and that still counts for most people
alive on Earth).   But as a way of life, a culture, consumerism seems
to me to be showing its age.

Designers know a whole lot about consumerism... after all, they're
making this seductive stuff and packing in the ol' shelf-appeal.  I
know a lot of designers, but I never met a designer who was a
"consumer."  They're eager collectors of objects, sometimes, but
they're never spotted gleefully hauling cartfuls of consumer goods out
of the Wal-Mart so as to keep up with the Joneses. 

*Designers are not thrifty and abstemious people, or morally opposed
to materialism.  They just don't go for the story there, in much the
same way that guys at the Hershey factory don't glut themselves on
candy bars every morning. 

*The kingpin of "50-year-old consumer culture" is the car.  The car is
the ultimate big-bang consumer item.  Especially young guys with some
disposable income and no kids -- these guys used to have a burning
consumer lust for cars, really unfeigned and enthusiastic and intense. 
It was all about personal power, sex appeal, status, prestige. It
seemed totally natural, at the time.  I really sense a major
disenchantment and a jaded loss of interest there, and not just because
I hang out in Turin and I've seen what's left of Detroit.

*It's not that cars have no modern use for people, but the social
attitudes toward them, the sense of cultural aspiration...  People go
through the motions about cars, but the fierce glee's not there any
more.  Even the car companies don't have it. The promotional machinery
of mass media is gone.  The huge sums spent to build that awareness and
fan those consumer needs is going somewhere else.

*It's rather like people's sudden discovery that they don't like
newspapers.  What, how?  How could people not like newspapers? 
Newspapers are the news.  They're power, politics, business, the
women's pages, the book reviews, the movie schedules, and also
chock-full of car ads... Then it turns out they really existed because
they were grouping information around a narrow channel of supply and
demand which no longer exists.  

*I suspect that rather a lot of consumer goods are in a similar
situation to newspapers... if you weren't repeatedly told that you
wanted this, if there were other methods to accomplish similar aims...
would you want that thing, even if it were free?  Maybe you can get
something else that performs almost as well, over at the Chinese
grocery, and it costs one tenth as much...  Maybe it can be a service
instead of an item... or maybe you're a bottom-feeder, you're living
off Craigslist, not because you're thrifty, but because shopping is
boring to you, it's ungainly and old-fashioned, it's too much trouble
nowadays.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #118 of 223: david gault (dgault) Sat 9 Jan 10 20:50

    

going back to the beginning of this discussion,
Bruce states (to illustrate the difficulty of planning for
long term financial stability):
 
 You want to give your Dad,
 back in 1974, a coherent picture of what 2010 looks like.  You know,
 something very actionable, lucid and practical, where he can just slap
 the cash on the counter and everything works out great for the family.

If Dad's cash had gone into Chevron shares at $3.00 each, things would
be looking pretty good for the family.  Whether the same is true 
for young dad's of today, I don't know.  But it's a definite possibility. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #119 of 223: david gault (dgault) Sat 9 Jan 10 20:52

    

apostrophe error, my bad
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #120 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 10 22:29

    
That point about the loss of enthusiasm for the car, for consumer
goods, for really intense marathon shopping experiences... it feels
like a symptom of depression. And maybe that's the difference between
economic depression vs garden variety recession... a real loss of
energy and motivation. I saw it at Christmas - the shoppers didn't
really hit the streets and stores until the last week, and on my few
excursions into mainstream retail environments, everybody I saw seemed
shell-shocked.

I think we're in a real transition, that the world is changed forever.
I don't mean in a dystopian or apocalyptic sense. It's a whimper, not
bang, sort of change. We're confronted with our real limitations.
Resources are not infinite. Our energies ebb and flow. We're mortal
after all. 

Somehow this seems liberating.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #121 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 10 02:47

    
*Chevron stock, is it?  Well, buying into oil has seemed like the big
easy money ever since the Beverly Hillbillies.

*If you own oil wells, people come and kill you for oil.  If you own
financial instruments that represent oil, you're not doing all that
great either.  If you own Exxon-Mobil stock, you're complicit in the
collapse of civilization.  I wouldn't be urging anybody back in the 70s
energy crisis to jump right on top of that stuff.

*There are such things as indexed vice stocks.  Where you invest in
enterprises that are evil, and that everybody knows and says are evil.
Gambling, tobacco, porn...  Vice stocks tend to do pretty well, but
lately, even the vice stocks haven't been doing all that great.  Not
even cynicism pays.

*For porn to lose money is an awesome development.  Porn is the
ultimate hybrid of consumerism and sex.  Bigger than Hollywood, huge. 
Or at least it used to be.  Pr0n got the full-scale disruptive
de-monetization treatment.  You can always say that "men's lustful
needs are eternal, so that lust must have gone somewhere else," but
men's lustful needs for *commercial, consumerized, profitable* lust are
not eternal. They're just a period artifact.  Porn is probably as old
as the Willendorf Venus but mass-produced consumer porn is not much
older than recorded music.

*I just saw somebody's painfully compiled list of porn stars on
Twitter.  Porn stars have a tough line of work, they don't exactly
stand on their dignity, but jeez, to see 'em reduced to Twittering? 
Next somebody's gonna tell 'em that they need to do what broke
musicians have to do and specialize in personal performances.

*Look at this strange thing.  Got it off William Gibson's Twitter
stream.  It's a NAVY SEAL watch called the "Beverly Hills Boutique
Incursion model."

http://bit.ly/5iCdet

*I'm sure that knicknack was designed by some GenXer who's all
chuckling to himself about his edgy postmodern subversiveness, but
that's a consumerist crisis-of-faith thing going on there.  It's like
some parody out of ADBUSTERS, only less self-righteous.  It somehow
reminds me of Soviet red-hot jazz stars or swoony Third Reich movie
divas, guys who were really hep and chicks who were really sexy, but
under hopelessly oxymoronic conditions, just... nowhere to advance to
and nothing left to conserve.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #122 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 10 02:53

    
*You can make an argument that consumers who have lost their taste for
Hershey bars are just plain old.  The planet is aging rapidly.  Old
people aren't building fresh nests, they don't need to stock up on
kitchenware and white goods.

*So the question would be, what are 24-year-olds up to. People 24
years old have income and lack responsible burdens, so they represent
futurity because they're doing things that won't reappear until 20
years later when they're rich grownups.  American 24 year olds are
fighting two land wars in a depression.  I would expect the attitudes
inculcated there to last a while, even if we have some sudden miracle
boom from turning grass into diamonds.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #123 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 10 03:08

    
*I'm very keen on the worst-case scenario, because, as a novelist,
it's the easiest place to find important things that most people aren't
talking about.

*But I also fret about people's lack of a best-case scenario.  People
rarely think hard enough about what to do when their wishes come true. 
They can't take yes for an answer, and that's bad.   When they win the
lottery -- somebody's gonna win it, come on -- they're all bewildered
and dubious and anhedonic.  They don't know how to shape up and accept
the social realities of a massive success; they don't know how to
become respectable, they don't know how to join or maintain a ruling
class; they're jittery and freaky, like mafia dons or rock and roll
idols.

*Confronting a huge success is not the same as greedy daydreaming or
getting jumped-up above your proper station.  The best-case should just
be part of a conceptual toolkit, a mental framework for confronting
possible developments.  We don't prepare people for that; we urge them
to get rich, but once they are rich, they have to depend on pure hokum
folk-wisdom.  

*"Preppies" used to be rich kids in preparatory schools who were
getting ready to join dad's East Coast Establishment.  Today "preppers"
are worried teabag types stocking crowbars and road-flares in the
basement.  Neither one of 'em seem to be prepared for anything that's
particularly plausible.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #124 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 10 07:19

    
Here's a US-centric perspective...

The jobless rate is at 10% and probably growing, but most of the
people I know, many in their twenties and thirties, aren't in those
stats, because they've been coworking and freelancing. Those who were
in traditional jobs and were laid off were really a kind of human
sacrifice - many of those companies showed big profits precisely
because they gutted their workforce. And the financial firms aren't
sweating too much, I just heard that Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan Chase
posted their biggest profits ever. Credit card operations are raking it
in because, absent any regulations to present usury, they've boosted
their rates into loan-shark ranges. (A law was passed to rein them in,
but Congress built in a delay because they "needed it to prepare." I
heard Barney Franks say they'd promised not to go wild raising rates in
the interim, but according to him, they promptly broke that promise.)

Point is that, at the moment, the rich are indeed getting richer and
the poor - and middle-class - is getting poorer.

I'm hearing that companies will have to start hiring again, because
they cut more jobs than they could bear for too long, just to balance
the books and then some. It's smart for Obama to say that jobs are his
new priority, knowing that widespread hiring must resume soon enough.
Or maybe they'll outsource, in which case the freelancing coworkers
will get a boost.

It strikes me that nobody has a handle on any of this, really. I know
conspiracy theorists who have explanations, essentially that shadowy
powerful entities are pulling strings, and none of us can see their
manipulations through the fog of managed media. Social media is just
more, sort of populist, fog. The better investigative journalist
enterprises are starving for money, so reporting will only get worse,
unless people like Jay Rosen, Evan Smith, Dan Gillmor, and Pete Lewis
figure out new funding models and maybe partnerships between
journalists and bloggers.

There's a whole culture of angry right-wing extremists with a very
narrow view of reality. They're pissed off, for instance, about climate
change - they deny that it's happening... it's just a plot cooked up
by - don't know who, exactly. Scientists, to get grant money?
Speculators, to create a new carbon economy? A troll on Twitter tried
to engage me with tweets about Obama, the financial abyss he's supposed
to fix, and climate change as a scam to fleece the world. 

You can feel the anger in his comments - this guy is pissed off and
spoiling for a fight. There's a whole army of those guys, stewing in
the juices of social media echo chambers and mid-media propaganda
machines. Their perception is so distorted, you can't even talk to 'em.
I feel for those guys, they're in a lot of pain. I find myself wishing
that I could engage them in conversation, that they would listen with
fresh, objective ears and think about what's real. I'd have to do that,
too, of course. I have my own conditions and biases and could be just
as wrong as anybody. Nobody really knows.

Last night I was lying in my bed in a deep theta state, and it came to
me that I'm a relatively harmonious aggregate of cells and patterns in
a universe that is beyond my imagining... and my own lame attempts to
find meaning at a cosmic level are laughable. I don't have any idea why
I'm here, why you're here, what any of this means or whether it means
anything. The universe could be random, could be a great conscious
entity with interdependent components struggling at self-definition
moment by moment, it could be a creation of some god-entity whose plan
for it is obscure. I just have no clue. I meditate and can barely get a
handle on my own delusion.

That might have been a moment of kensho - enlightenment - or more
delusion. Whatever it was, it reminded me that human consciousness is a
blind spot.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #125 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 10 08:11

    
I can remember asking Russians what had gone wrong with Soviet
society, and why they were flailing in their Transition, and I used to
get such marvelous answers.  They were rich and much-pondered and
super-detailed, with all kinds of amazing war-stories and out-there
anecdotal evidence, and no two of 'em ever agreed on anything.

That might have been okay, if they'd just worshipped the Almighty
Dollar.  You don't have to fret overly about the deep meanings and the
missed opportunities when everything's available for cash.  Of course,
if that sheet anchor breaks, you're exposed to the same existential
disturbances you had earlier, only more so.

"If you're so rich, why aren't you smart?"  "If all you get is nailed,
everything looks like a hammer."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #126 of 223: bill braasch (bbraasch) Sun 10 Jan 10 08:16

    
the super-empowered angry man meme in context:

dad's a nigerian banker:  underwear man en route Detroit
dad's holding Chevron in the IRA:  twitter troll blames Obama for abyss

you own your own delusion
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #127 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 10 Jan 10 08:28

    
<There's a whole army of those guys, stewing in
the juices of social media echo chambers and mid-media propaganda
machines. Their perception is so distorted, you can't even talk to
'em.>

<I'm a relatively harmonious aggregate of cells and patterns in
a universe that is beyond my imagining... and my own lame attempts to
find meaning at a cosmic level are laughable.>

Really fine post, Jon. Thanks! 

Just one thought.  These days it's not cosmic meaning that most needs
intelligent discourse.  Rather, it's those aggregations of disharmony
(and destruction) promulgated by the usual suspects that needs to be
continually called out and engaged in the here-and-now.  
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #128 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 10 13:09

    
I wonder if the new focus on folk craziness is partially availability
bias, like how crime reporting makes people feel less safe no matter
where they are. People were always talking about crazy shit among
themselves but this wasn't amplified so much before.

What about young people who are reasonably sane? It seems like the
tendency towards social isolation in U.S. culture has to take a hit
when most people stay in touch (however tentatively) with all the
friends they ever met for their whole lives. Being a recluse takes
serious effort when even recluses are tapped into the chatter flow. 

Of course tribalism isn't new. Maybe geographically distributed
tribalism is newish. Immigrants sending money home is already a major
economic force and probably a lot less damaging than deluded investment
money.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #129 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 10 15:30

    
I'm working on a presentation for Wednesday's Ignite Austin that says
we have the potential to grow more (globally) connected, more social
and collaborative, using the web. In fact we seem to be going there.
That doesn't mean that we're all going to be holding (virtual) hands
and signing Kumbaya, in fact having so many people communicating at
once feels pretty chaotic. So I'm not saying that it will be wonderful,
but I think that's what's happening. It'll happen at various levels
and in various communities. My colleagues and I, for instance, have
been talking about the inevitable business uses of online
social/collaborative tools... the label "social business" is starting
to have some weight. 

As a consultant that's what I'm most interested in - helping people
collaborate... facilitating communication that results in actions and
deliverables, vs the more casual conversations of early virtual
community. Kevin Leahy and I started investigating Google Wave here in
Austin - we set up a local meetup before many people had access to
Wave, and we've had interestingly diverse attendance over the several
months we've been doing it. People are looking for the next thing, and
I think it's sustained engagement and truly effective networking and
collaboration. That's what I see those reasonably sane young people
doing - they're more social that we ever thought about being, and
they're coordinating with SMS and Facebook, and to some extent,
Twitter. 

I'm fascinated by coworking arrangements, too, and the way they're
breeding working, not necessarily formal, partnerships. I thought it
was interesting that Austin's coworking facility, Conjunctured, opened
a second space - in Shanghai. (http://conjunctured.com/88spaces/)

I find myself spending a lot of time around people who are earnest,
creative, hardworking, and not greedy. They're not trying to make a
million bucks. They're not trying to be hot-shots. They're just
following their passion. And doing more and more socially - there's
probably hundreds of social events in Austin alone every month,
coordinated my social media. People aren't satisfied hanging out
online, they want face-to-face engagement... but it's so easy and
effective to use the web to coordinate.

This has to be going somewhere. Feels like evolution, it'll be
interesting to see where it leads.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #130 of 223: John Payne (satyr) Sun 10 Jan 10 18:26

    
> facilitating communication that results in actions and deliverables

I've spent more time than I care to think about fretting pointlessly
over why that sort of communication wasn't more common on The WELL 
than it has been.  It isn't because that's not what most of us are
here for.

It must help a lot if you can get people to self-select on the basis
of whether they're engaging with others to a common, tangible end, or
simply for the pleasure of engaging.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #131 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 10 18:38

    
Bijoy Goswami and I spent some time talking, thinking, and presenting
about how to build effective communities. In his book _The Human
Fabric_, Bijoy describes a system of personality types - maven,
relater, and evangelist. (This isn't a unique system; Malcolm Gladwell
talks about something similar in _The Tipping Point_). He says that
most people are on a scale between two of the personality types - i.e.
you might be a maven-relater or an evangelist-maven. This is based on
core values - mavens are driven by knowledge, relaters by
relationships, and evangelists by action. The latter tend to be more
results oriented. Bijoy felt that many online communities were
naturally dominated by relater-maven types, who will end to focus on
conversations and knoweldge but not on results. We were thinking that
you could build results-oriented or action-oriented communities if you
had some people on board who have strong evangelist energy.

If this is correct, then it could be that the WELL is dominated by
people who are more into talking, thinking, and knowing than doing.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #132 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 10 02:42

    
"If this is correct, then it could be that the WELL is dominated by
people who are more into talking, thinking, and knowing than doing."

*Is that a good-old-fashioned YOYOW Meaning-of-the-WELL meta-debate
that I see hatching there?  Wow!  Such good times, eh?

*I'm sidling off into the Serbian mountains tomorrow.  I suppose it's
to go breather fresh air and to see the snow -- for a Texan, snow
remains an exotic substance, something like cocaine or fairy-dust...
but mostly I go up there to get offline.

*I can't doubt that today's social media is a very different matter
from bulletin-board systems of the 1980s, the web of the 90s. New
affordances, new effects, new habits in cyberland.  I also can't doubt
that, long before it gets its feet under it, "social media" will be
destabilized by something else.  Maybe some ubiquitous locative "cloud
media" that helps urban people gain "deep walkability."  

*In tomorrow's locative Cloud Media, you become traumatized by the
discovery that the people in your neighborhood, a place that once
seemed so calming and homey to you, are actually extremist lunatics
with whom you share no humane issues, and you retreat back to the
conservative safety of FaceBook.  

*Tomorrow I plan to divest myself of my various gadgets and tromp
around under trees in the snow.  It seems to help, periodically.  The
city noise fades and, more to the point now, the Internet noise fades. 
I wouldn't say that I feel more natural out in Nature, because that
notion is a Romantic crock, but I would say that it's become more
soothing and clarifying to get away from the Internet than it is to get
away from a city.  Putting down the laptop has become a bigger deal
than blowing town.

*Even then I can't get completely away from the Net; next week I'll
still have to creep online for an hour or so a day, so as to check for
distant emergencies and visit the WELL here.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #133 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 10 02:52

    
*Roxxxy the sex robot, another uploader spinoff:

http://www.theage.com.au/technology/my-girlfriends-hot-but-she-has-a-builtin-c
ooling-system-20100110-m0tk.html

(...)

Inspiration for the sex robot sprang from the September 11, 2001
attacks. ''I had a friend who passed away in 9/11,'' Hines said. ''I
promised myself I would create a program to store his personality, and
that became the foundation for Roxxxy True Companion.''

(((Porn, 9/11 terror and uploading: a contemporary trio that oughta
guarantee at least a little press coverage.))) 

Hines sees the robot as a recreational innovation and an outlet for
the shy, people with sexual dysfunction and those who want to
experiment without risk.

Roxxxy costs between $US7000 ($7634) and $US9000 depending on
features.

(((So, first you're mourning your dear friend who perished in 9/11,
and seeking to keep his electronic mind preserved forever, and ten
years later you're mass-producing plastic genitalia.  The marvels of
modern tech development, ladies and gentlemen.)))
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #134 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 10 05:04

    
Sooner or later pervasive technologies will scale mountains, be
persistently everywhere, but hopefully there'll always be an opt-out
provision. 

Jamais Cascio was writing about this several years ago:
http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/002651.html

"Soon -- probably within the next decade, certainly within the next
two -- we'll be living in a world where what we see, what we hear, what
we experience will be recorded wherever we go. There will be few
statements or scenes that will go unnoticed, or unremembered. Our day
to day lives will be archived and saved. What&#146;s more, these
archives will be available over the net for recollection, analysis,
even sharing.

"And we will be doing it to ourselves.

"This won't simply be a world of a single, governmental Big Brother
watching over your shoulder, nor will it be a world of a handful of
corporate siblings training their ever-vigilant security cameras and
tags on you. Such monitoring may well exist, probably will, in fact,
but it will be overwhelmed by the millions of cameras and recorders in
the hands of millions of Little Brothers and Little Sisters. We will
carry with us the tools of our own transparency, and many, perhaps
most, will do so willingly, even happily."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #135 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Mon 11 Jan 10 07:47

    
From offline reader, Grant Henninger:

Bruce, you mention that, to paraphrase, we're facing the end of
consumer culture.  While I agree with this assessment, I'm not 100%
convinced it will turn out to be true.  The baby-boomers have spent
their entire lives consuming, I find it hard to imagine them suddenly
stopping.  However, it might be that this downturn in the economy has
made them see how fragile their retirement savings is (if they have
any at all).  If enough 'boomers change their saving habits we could
see a marginal change in spending that would truly affect the consumer
economy.  Consumerism requires an economy of scale, and if a marginal
change in savings brings that scale down enough, we might reach a
tipping point where it's just not as economically viable to build
cheap chotchkies in China as it has been.  I have a feeling the
consumer economy won't scale down as gracefully as it as scaled up.

So with that backdrop, I wanted to ask: What comes after the consumer
economy?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #136 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Mon 11 Jan 10 07:48

    
(Any offline readers who would like to ask a question or post a
comment, please email us at <inkwell@well.com>)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #137 of 223: Thomas Petersen (sushi101) Mon 11 Jan 10 07:55

    
jonl

"...Soon -- probably within the next decade, certainly within the next
two -- we'll be living in a world where what we see, what we hear,
what
we experience will be recorded wherever we go. There will be few
statements or scenes that will go unnoticed, or unremembered. Our day
to day lives will be archived and saved. What&#146;s more, these
archives will be available over the net for recollection, analysis,
even sharing..."

Actually Peter F. Hamilton writes about this in his The Reality
Dysfunction.

I wonder whether we will be writing in 100 years from now or whether
we will be communicating through shared experiences.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #138 of 223: John Payne (satyr) Mon 11 Jan 10 09:07

    
> What comes after the consumer economy?

The consumer economy is, among other things, a mass-production economy,
many copies of each item, bundled together by the carton, pallet, and
truckload.

Ubiquitous computing has begun to facilitate the reintroduction of 
unique, one-off design to mass production, beginning with factory 
options on automobiles fifty years ago or more, and reaching right
down to whether you want pickle and onion on your hamburger.

The inception of generalized factories intended to produce small runs
of various types of objects, reconfiguring themselves quickly in between,
will shift control back in the direction of the craftsman, in this case 
desingers using CAD/CAM software, occasionally in conjunction with work 
by hand.  Final assembly might frequently be left to the customer, as
is currently the case with office furniture.

In that economy, instead of owning many things, the objective will be
to own the right things that fit perfectly into your situation.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #139 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 11 Jan 10 10:07

    
This talk of moving beyond a consumerist society is reminiscent in
some ways of the old hippie movement where materialism was challenged,
where to be anti-materialistic was the goal.  Just as that sentiment
dissipated into a realization that it takes materials to survive on the
planet--even "alternative" materials--the idea of moving beyond
"consumerism" is similarly suspect.

If there is one thing that the information age has brought us, it is
far greater efficiencies in manufacturing, distribution, and
economies-of-scale for consumers, and, most of all, a global
marketplace.  I'll always need size 11 1/2 shoes for my feet whether
they are Clarks from England, Honduran-made Nikes, or Birkenstocks from
someplace else.  My Ikea furniture is designed in Sweden, but
manufactured in Vietnam. It may offer more customizing features in the
future, but it still arrives in Renton, Washington offloaded from a
steel shipping container on a Panamanian cargo ship in the Port of
Seattle bundled with utmost efficiency with an optimal number of other
quasi-customizable pieces of Ikea furniture.

What is partially being discussed here is not moving beyond
"consumerism", but a possible return to what used to be called
"voluntary simplicity."  This is more of a consciousness shift where
we, as individuals, more deliberately address the manner in which we
will consume, and the ancillary effects of this consumption. 

Likewise, some of this will be downscaling--the result of
affordability.  If I only have $100.00 instead of $300.00 to spend next
year for my size 11 1/2 shoes, will it simply be more prudent to
purchase one very sturdy pair instead of six volume discount specials.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #140 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 10 10:51

    
I agree that what Bruce described aligns very well with the "voluntary
simplicity" concept, though we might find "simplicity" less voluntary
given another trend Bruce describes - the trend toward free. Also given
the impact of rather profound economic collapse. Sure, companies are
showing profits and banks are looking better, but the word on the
street is that these are cosmetic effects. Companies fix their bottom
line by dropping productive capacity (i.e. laying people off), but
diminished productive capacity will eventually take its toll, so that
layoffs only work as a temporary stopgap measure. I think it's very
possible that the economy will continue to wind down, and at some point
we'll run out of cheap oil, so transportation will be an issue -
prices for the goods you described that are transport-intensive will
escalate beyond reach, and we'll depend more on local. SO, yeah, we'll
be downscaling. Imagine how the U.S. would change if the job losses
proved permanent and kept increasing, and oil prices and food prices
started rising again. These sorts of things snowball... pretty soon,
simplicity is mandatory, not voluntary.

The future's never real, that's just a scenario - but it doesn't seem
improbable.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #141 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Mon 11 Jan 10 11:02

    
I was boggling at the idea of cars ceasing to matter. Cars are
embedded in American art and culture. 

But trains were just that deeply embedded, and look at our train
system. We still have trains running back and forth in our music, but I
ride a bicycle to work every morning along where train tracks used to
run.

So, suppose that we all have the same kind of realization about
consumer products that we had about candy when we grew up: it's all the
same five ingredients in different combinations and shapes, and that's
all it will ever be. Suppose we go along year after year with the same
old more or less satisfactory scratched bits of metal and plastic.

Well, the first thing that happens is that we all get laid off. If we
stop selling each other artfully shaped bits of plastic and metal, we
don't have an economy. 

That would be . . . tricky. I don't have to be a ruthless scrabbling
bastard because I can earn everything I need between 9 and 5. If I had
to be some kind of businessman to survive, I would presumably wind up
like all the other incompetent businessmen: scared, out of my depth,
angry, always on the edge of becoming vicious.

Slippage, to much the same point.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #142 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Mon 11 Jan 10 12:29

    
from offsite reader Grant Henninger:

Scott, I think you kinda miss the point of my question.  It's not
about some neo-hippie movement where people look to live a more simple
life.  It's about survival, and the fact that if the 'boomers don't
want to be eating dog food in Miami when they're 80, they need to
start saving more.

Over the past three decades, new capital has been created in our
economy through finance and lending.  For the most part, we haven't
added value to the economy through labor or converting raw goods into
useful products.  Of course, there is still manufacturing happening in
the US, but it doesn't drive our economy like it once did.  (The
exception to this has been the construction industry, but the value of
the homes built pales in comparison to the value those homes have been
leveraged for.)  We've created wealth by leveraging our existing
assets, primarily by refinancing our homes and borrowing against our
future earnings in the form of credit card debt.

I'm in a unique position to see this change in behavior.  My parents
are divorced and I've acquired a few in-laws in the past couple of
years, so I have three sets of 'boomers to observe going through this
process.  One set is well prepared for retirement; one set has some
savings but not enough; and the third set has no savings at all.  It's
interesting that it's that middle set that is changing their behavior,
working to move more of their discretionary income to savings.  The
first set of parents don't have a need to change their spending
habits, partly because they haven't consumed much over the years,
which has contributed to them being the most well off as they approach
retirement.  The final set of parents have never seemed to worry about
the future and their lack of savings, and that attitude seems to have
maintained.

I don't know what the generalized retirement accounts look like for
the baby-boomers.  I really have little idea of how many 'boomers
would join each of my parental units in these three categories.
However, I suspect that the majority of 'boomers are in that middle
group.  They have some savings, but not enough to get them through the
end of their lives.  It is this group that is likely to divert more of
them discretionary spending to savings.  So what happens if they do
that?

Like I said in my original post, we're talking about a marginal
change, one that's small, one that doesn't involve a wholesale change
of attitude or outlook.  But many of our globalized businesses run on
small margins.  They have to sell a lot of widgets to make a profit.
So a small, marginal change can have big impacts.  If companies can't
ship enough widgets, the entire economy of scale that has made
international trade so successful will diminish.

I'm not trying to say that we won't have international trade, or that
consumerism is dying, or that finance won't create new wealth.  I'm
simply saying that the type of consumerism that has seen our economy
through the past three decades won't be the bedrock of our future
economic growth.  Just as manufacturing use to be the driver of the US
economy, and now it's no longer, but there are still manufacturing
jobs here; consumerism will cease to be the driver of the US economy,
something else will take its place, but there will still be consumer
jobs.  My question is, what will take the place of consumerism as the
main driver of the US economy?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #143 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 11 Jan 10 12:54

    
"what will take the place of consumerism as the main driver of the US
economy?"

Thanks for the clarification, Grant.  My point was less about anything
neo-hippie today, but the idea of "voluntary simplicity" that came out
of that movement.  You are talking more about widespread "involuntary
simplicity" which I addressed, somewhat.

As to your well-posed question, I would suggest, barring total
collapse of the global economic system for whatever reason, consumerism
will morph based on the economics of supply and demand. In this we
will likely see a change of degree, not a change of kind.  How we
consume may well change.  Global consumerism won't likely go away.

(As a self-employed young boomer, I certainly don't see a magic
retirement age on the horizon.  I expect to be working until I am
unable to do so.  I think, as more and more people are forced to
"dance" to make ends meet, that this will become more the rule than the
exception).
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #144 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 10 13:47

    
> I expect to be working until I am unable to do so.

I had the same fantasy. What you'll find is that, if you lose your job
or decide to be self-employed for a while, and you're 40 or older,
you'll have a very tough time finding a job. If you're 50 or 60, nobody
will hire you. And if you tough it out on the job until you're pushing
60, you might be laid off ahead of other, younger workers. Don't
assume that, just because you're willing to work until you drop, that
anybody will hire you or pay you.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #145 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 11 Jan 10 14:13

    
Good points, Jon.  

By "dance" I meant for me, now 54, mostly self-employment work
(Selling on Ebay, freelancing, other writing, Real Estate--hoping it
stabilizes) or those temporary gigs like doing US Census work.  

I actually prefer the independence this affords, and, yes, Grant, the
R.E. crash is very much changing my attitudes toward "consumption" on a
number of fronts.  That's just me, but I highly doubt that I am alone
with this these days (as Jon suggests).  
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #146 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 10 14:24

    
I really think we might become a nation - or world - of freelancers
and modular small organizations that use online tools to coordinate
larger projects and actions. If you're read Coase, Benkler, Shirky (and
jonl!) you can see that coming.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #147 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 10 15:52

    
Current events on Enceladus, a no-kidding Saturnian moon.

http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.cfm?release=2010-006
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #148 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 10 20:30

    
Images like that make me long for manned space travel, and at the same
time realize it's probably unnecessary and impractical. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #149 of 223: Gail Williams (gail) Mon 11 Jan 10 22:23

    
I do so like the gifts Cassini is sending us! 

Let's see -- people on Enceladus.  If it was me, it would be one
amazing experience. If it was somebody else, I would hope they had an
excellent photographer's eye, and a lot of context of what ice and snow
looks like here, so they could seek what looks different and what is
the same.  Could that be done with a remote probe controlled from here?
Maybe so, it might be fine.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #150 of 223: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 12 Jan 10 06:46

    
Apologies if this has been covered - I've had to skip through many
posts to get here in time - but this is my burning question for the
year:

I am concerned about the urgent, runaway feedback loop triggering
aspect of global warming.  Bill McKibbin and groups like 350.org argue
that gigantic immediate CO2 and Methane reductions are necessary to
avoid passing set-points of irreversible change.  Melt an ice cap or
thaw permafrost and you trigger cycle-altering changes that no amount
of human effort can then undo.

So how do you get all of humanity to turn on a dime? Now.

As you said WRT some other sort of change above, and I agree:
>We shouldn't blithely let
convulsions happen while we're pretending to do something else.

Thanks for your thoughts.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #151 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 10 10:16

    
<keta> - obviously you don't, and that's the problem. However in much
of the world, the issue of climate change is taken seriously, though
it's a struggle politically to coordinate responsive action, and I
think that applies pretty much anywhere. In the U.S., which should
lead, we still have people who consider climate change controversial,
like the guy I posted about who said it's a "scam." 

Bruce's Viridian Design Movement was an attempt to raise awareness by
influencing designers, artists, and futurists to think about the
problem - these are folks who have huge impact on our perception and
our rethinking. It was a way to hack the zeitgeist. I think it worked
as well as anything, certainly better than gloom & doom wrangling.

On another subject, I just saw a chart at The Economist on "the
decline of freedom": http://tinyurl.com/yea7l89
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #152 of 223: Gail (gail) Tue 12 Jan 10 17:26

    
Interesting link.  Fewer countries going though the motions of
elections.  Who'd have thunk?   On the other hand, the comments are
slightly amusing.  Freedom is a state of mind, there's bias in
describing democracies as free, etc.  

Perhaps we are more cynical internationally about elections and
freedom, as well as about markets and freedom.  Will that make is wiser
or less willing to do the hard work of trying for fairness and
justice?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #153 of 223: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 12 Jan 10 20:08

    
Clarification: I see as I scroll back to catch up that Bruce is off to
the mountains... Jon, are we talking amongst ourselves here for the
duration, or does he intend to be back to continue?

I agree that the Veridian Design movement was/is hugely influential --
it really is amazing how much progress has been made based on the
premises there: that solving global warming is a cultural and artistic
design problem, not an economic or political one - first making
participating in the solution more compelling and FUN than not.  And
that civil society is where the crucial inital levers are functional. 
That was right, is right, and it's working.  It continues to work and
propagate despite Bruce's personal signing off on the movement with
what seemed to be more of a whimper than necessary.

I disagree...well, I'm ambivalent about...dismissing the idea of
turning humanity on a dime with a simple, "well you don't."  Many
imposing edifices and behaviours have crumbled "overnight" - Berlin
Wall, Soviet Union, civil liberties post-911, mortgage lending... 
Isn't it possible that the ground worldwide is fertile for a small
compelling cultural tip that changes everything?

On the other hand, if it really is impossible, then the TRUE design
project of now is something totally different.  If we're off the cliff
and there's no practical hope of avoiding triggering runaway
Terraforming, then...well...


So, if it's not too late (but any year now it will be), got any ideas?
 If it is too late, what might be a creative cultural approach to
admitting that and getting practical with the situation?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #154 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 10 21:04

    
The conversation can continue here as scheduled, but apparently
without Bruce for a few days.

A significant, really ugly climate event might accelerate responses,
but it would have to be profoundly nasty. You know, I've seen people on
breathing tubes from emphysema take a smoke. That wake-up call has to
ring pretty loud for many people. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #155 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 05:50

    
*I'm not dead, people, I'm just up in a mountain village.  A ski
resort mountain village without any snow.

*They say it may snow tomorrow.  Hopefully it won't be one of those
brain-freezing Greenhouse torrents of snow.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #156 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:03

    
*So, about this big issue of consumer culture coming to an end, or
consumer culture showing its age, failing, losing its drive.  A
development of that kind would clearly be no small deal. I may have to
go into the issue in some depth here, so forgive me it this becomes a
lecture from an industrial design professor.

*It might help to begin by clarifying what I think we are talking
about.  I think "consumerism" began in Paris around the 1850s, with the
birth of the first Paris arcades and department stores.  Consumerism
spread from Paris to other major metropolitan centers, London, New
York, Vienna, commonly presaged by some kind of grand exposition of
industry, some kind of Crystal Palace promotional shebang to get the
people properly oiled up.

Consumerism also spread along the railroads with the Montgomery Ward
"wish book."  Logistics always counted for a great deal in consumer
society.

Consumerism often met with severe setbacks, too.  World Wars one and
two put the planet on a war footing.  Most of the world was always far
too poor for consumerism, it simply lacked the productive capacity. 
State-controlled communist regimes outlawed consumerism in large parts
of the world.  

So consumerism didn't become a full-blown -ism, a genuine popular way
of life, until the huge boom in the USA after the second world war.  It
require a huge, long-lasting boom in mass prosperity, mass production,
mass mobility, mass logistics,and  mass promotion to allowed people to
define themselves through their shopping behavior, by things they had.
 

So the thing I call "consumerism" is not all that old.  I don't want
it to be confused with, say, materialism, or the pleasure people take
in possessing things that they like.  I think that consumerism is a
rather specific historical formulation that depended on specific
industrial circumstances.  That's why I think it might be ending now,
or showing some real signs of genuine decline.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #157 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:23

    

Five years ago, in my design book SHAPING THINGS. I was speculating
about what might possibly happen twenty years from now.  I wrote that
"consumers" were a class of users of technology, preceded by a
different class called  "customers," and who might be followed by a
class of people called "wranglers."  

I don't want to recapitulate that argument here, because  it takes too
long, and it might well be wrong or just goofy.   But I do want look
examine some of the driving forces that might profoundly change life
for the future consumer -- forces already present in today's state of
the world.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #158 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:28

    
First, I think we should put aside the specter of hippie
anti-consumerism, or Voluntary Simplicity.  This is simply a lifestyle
choice known as "LOHAS" or "Lifestyles of Health and Sustainability."
It's perfectly well understood by marketers, because it is fifty years
old and about half as old as consumerism itself.  It's not going away
in a hurry, but it's not anti-consumerism, it's counter-consumerism.  

LOHAS has its own Whole Foods style retail chains, and its dietary and
clothing habits, which represent no genuine threat to consumerism at
all. LOHAS represents maybe seven percent of the American population --
much more so in core Blue State urban areas, of course; there are
spots where it dominates -- but could double in size with no problem to
the consumer system.  It represents no more a real threat to
consumerism than, say, New Age beliefs pose to mainstream Christianity.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #159 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:33

    
LOHAS isn't going away in a hurry because consumerism isn't going away
in a hurry.  Barring, of course, climate tipping points, massive
epidemics, nuclear exchanges and all that.

Consumerism has tremendous appeal.  It will not be dying suddenly next
year.  Nobody told us when "consumerism" was starting and we're not
gonna get an official obituary when it ends.  It'll linger like the
aristocratic system still lingers on.

Why do people stop being consumers?  This is like asking ourselves, 
"when did modern women and men stop wanting to be 'ladies and
gentlemen?'"  Clearly they haven't done that, or the wouldn't bluntly
say that they did.  But they did in fact; they don't aspire to it; it's
a hollow shell, a mere shibboleth.  Compare today's 'ladies and
gentlemen' to people with 19th century class structures. Any real
"lady" down at the strip-mall would come across like a complete social
freak: she wouldn't know how to open a door for herself, where to sit,
who to talk to, or what to purchase.

  Post-consumer people would be considered "consumers," but they would
almost entirely lack the actual, real-life behavior of carefree,
full-throated 1950s shopping orgies.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #160 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:39

    
"Consumerism" is not just a matter of buying tons of nice stuff.  It
represents an American freedom, a revolt by monetary capital against
social capital.  You just pay some dollars.  That's the good part, the
grand part of consumerism.   No sumptuary laws, no "this fine stuff is
not for the sordid likes of you."  You scarcely have to open your
mouth.  Being foreign is fine.  Being in a wheelchair is fine.

A plastic card will do, a swipe of the hand will do even, a mere
immaterial gesture.  Just put it in a bag or a box, drive it to a
private home.  There's lots. It's convenient. It saves time and,
compared to pre-consumer society, it saves oceans of raw HUMILIATION.

The humiliation of Communist black markets, of peasant societies.  An
endless network of half-mafia favors, just in order to get a pair of
shoes.  That social-capital wealth is exploitative.  It has winners who
win in glory and  losers who lose in shame.  The wealth is always
rooted in some minor crime, some act of demeaning prostitution, some
burning loss of status.  

Consumerism is also exploitative, but in a way that burns the soul
differently.  It's the dollar who is God.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #161 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:49

    
The stuff I consider a real threat to consumerism isn't the old stuff.
 Consumerism always bred at least some resistance and resentment, but
not enough to topple it.

Even a loss of dollars, poverty, doesn't too much threaten consumerism
-- we had a thriving consumerism when we were much poorer than today,
and poverty can sharpen the acquisitive appetite.

A path-toward-free threatens consumerism.  New means of distribution,
production, and promotion threaten consumerism.   

We pay with free Internet services with ads.  But they're not the old,
mass-propaganda ads: they're micro-targeted Google ads.  We're
witnessing catastrophe for admen and public relations.  

Andrew Keen says we pay for Free internet goods with our culture.  I
think he means that we're being culturally humiliated by our inability
to pay for music and literature.  But it could also be argued that,
under consumerism, massive ads ARE our real culture. They need to
blanket everybody, every surface, for consumerism to work.  Andrew's
beloved fine arts are some kind of alien imposition.   

Internet-purchases are not old-style consumerism, because they differ
in scary ways.   They're super-fast.  You can be a dog and no one
knows.  Stuff is shipped from remote locations.  The structure of
markets changes.  Those Amazon suggestions: "guys like you buy stuff
like this."  That's not the same as my going to the department store
and seeing what my boss buys when he goes shopping, so that I know what
brown shoes to aspire to.

Long tail markets appear.  Foreign stuff appears.  I can live in
Tokyo, be Japanese, and dress entirely in Italian clothes if I like. 
The semiotic pressure to keep up with the Joneses is missing.  I don't
even talk the Joneses now.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #162 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:51

    
Local consumer communities are replaced with interest-groups, who
compare notes online.  No more department stores: we don't want to mess
with the annoying overhead of other departments, any more than we want
to buy newspapers that talk too much about stuff that bores us. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #163 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 06:56

    
The Wal-Mart superlogistical big box store is the tunnel to China.

Sino-Globalization is a big deal, because it represents a global
material culture without American antecedents.  David Edgerton talks
about this in his book SHOCK OF THE OLD, which is about the modernity
of Third World material culture.  Sino-Global is not old-fashioned or
backward; its more modern than American goods.  Sino-Global means
aluminum cookware, plastic baskets,  ultra-cheap wristwatches,
clothing, footgear, bicycles, electronics, electrical fixtures,
tableware.  Flimsy-lloking but not actually all that flimsy.  By
historical standards, by modern standards in most centers of mass
population today, Sino-Global means a very high level of material
culture.  It doesn't look or act American, but you can furnish a
cubicle with Sino-Global stuff and do most any high-paying job. You can
get a college education.

"Disneyla," Cory Doctorow calls it. Ninety-percent functional.  It's
wide and deep.  It goes from  mass production in Shenzhen through
forgeries, knockoffs, all kinds of evasions of the IP structures that
the West struggles to impose.   All kinds of lower class favela debris.
 There are oceans of it. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #164 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:00

    
"Just Good Enough." When markets are overserved, people move toward
cheaper, disruptive goods.  Just Good Enough can be plenty food enough,
in beta software and elsewhere.

 Poor people wear fine clothes today, by historical standards.  Nobody
patches clothes, they're too cheap to patch.  Nobody wears real rags. 
Even the wartorn Congo is buried in bales of used Western clothing. 
You have to work at it to wear rags.

Look at this Muji ad.  The implications of this Muji "message" are
plenty weird.  Muj is not a humble, low-end retailer.  Muji is very
high-end, it's got some of the most gifted designers in the world.

http://www.muji.com/message/
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #165 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:03

    
Where do you PUT the stuff?  What function does it serve?

Consumer homes used to be storage depots on the railway from the
Montgomery Ward wish book. You got stuff because you needed it on hand,
you weren't sure you could have it again.   There is less needed in a
home today.  Homes were major centers of material production once.  
Kitchens cooked hundreds of meals from scratch,  sewing rooms produced
the family's clothing, garages fixed cars at home, workshops made
furniture, daughter sought social accomplishments and had a piano,
there was a conservatory, a trousseau, a hope chest. A smokehouse
maybe, a garden shed.

Somebody made and sold all that clutter.  They were objects, not
services.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #166 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:06

    
Divorce rates are a boon to the cheap goods at IKEA.  Families are
smaller. More people live alone. The population is aging and will never
be young again. Consumerism is adjusting to this, but it takes a toll.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #167 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:14

    
There's a loss of middle class aspiration. People no longer know what
kind of material culture they are aspiring to.  They are precarious,
they are a mobile symbolic analysis class, they are creatives, they are
clerks.    

"How is the Internet changing the way you think?" 

http://www.edge.org/q2010/q10_index.html

*Okay, Brockman's cadre are a pretty select group -- scientists,
hippie visionaries and culture gurus -- but that's an interesting set
of testaments.  None of them say that the Internet made them more
prosperous, that it helped them to settle down, that they feel better
about their future thanks to the Internet.

 Nobody says that the Internet gave them a sense of safe, fatherly,
middle-class things to do with a three year old.  It's great for
thinking about tons of weird crap, and it's rather bad for business and
governance, the Internet.

And for consumerism?  Nobody pays on the Internet.  They hate paying. 
They might mess with e-commerce for convenience sake, but give them
their head and they undercut, they conspire, they disintermediate, they
eBay and they Craigslist, they copy, they pirate, they cut and paste. 
Those are not consumer values.  Real consumers have brand loyalty. 
They're proud to pay because it shows how far they've come from
poverty, from precarity.  They want the car with fins.  They
specifically want the fins.

Internet people want to swap the behind-the-scenes story about the
fins, which is by no means the same impulse.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #168 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:17

    
Theres already SO MUCH STUFF!  Just a lot of STUFF.  There's only so
much stuff to transform into material goods on the crust of the planet!
  The clutter's all over the place.  Millions of old bldgs...  Cuban
cars half a century old and still puttering...  Moderns in
formerly-Communist countries are wandering around in the ruins of an
alien civilation.  New York highrises are old, old.   UNESCO heritage
centers cover huge swathes of Italy: you can't swing a cat without
hitting a protected Baroque cathedral.

So much stuff, unconsumed but irremovable...   Gothic High Tech.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #169 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:22

    
The moguls are not helping matters.  They might as well be an alien
species.  The elite are supposed to pioneer trickle-down middle-class
goods.  That's not working.

Today's ultra-wealthy are into oddities private space flight, private
jets, superyachts, pet Senators, and collecting old media. How many
middle-class people are going to ever own a pet Senator?

The ultra-wealthy are into the immaterial: not gold ingots, not
washing machines,  but positions as board of directors, stock options,
political sway. 

But those Dubai apts are likely to get pretty lonely, also not very
socially or culturally productive, when there are way too many finance
vampires and not enough rosy-cheeked Bella Snows.  The ultrarich don't
produce enough to stimulate a mass consumer economy for private space
rockets. 

You can't spend two million dollars on a pair of socks.  You might be
a Medici, but you can't be a Sears and Roebuck.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #170 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:27

    
I'm almost done now.  I could go on -- I plan to, but why belabor the
point?  

This is it, a high point of consumerism as a culture: Norman
Rockwell's "Freedom from Want."

http://www.normanrockwellvt.com/NewsletterIssues/FreedomfromWant.htm

*Look at those people.  That's how far we've drifted from consumerism.
 Look at their pure, visceral satisfaction at Grandma's enormous
glazed turkey.  That turkey is a social, political and familial good in
and of itself. Its a political message, a civil right, even.  "We're
not starving.  Not here in American."

Well, not one of them is obese, either.  They all look the same.
Nobody's married to a Nigerian.  Nobody's dressed like an Italian. 
None of them is big on Facebook.  None of them is flying to Brussels
tomorrow.  None of them bought a car by searching values on an online
site.  None of them earns a living with a laptop.  They never saw a
cellphone in their lives.

*They're a real 20th century culture, a powerful and attractive one,
but this isn't the 20th century.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #171 of 223: Eric Gower (gower) Wed 13 Jan 10 07:46

    
(standing ovation -- don't ever stop, Bruce)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #172 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Wed 13 Jan 10 08:23

    
Your best State of the World rant yet, BruceS!  You're a gentleman and
a scholar...and I feel like I'm leaving the house today as a
counter-consumerist wrangler out to tackle a new age...


...bowl of Kellogg's first, then fill those eBay orders with cheap
goods from China as I look out at the warm winter western Washington
drizzle that threatens to undermine my next door neighbor's Winter
Olympics, where it's so tough to consume tickets because eCorporate
sponsors you never heard of buy them up in big blocks, (then never have
anyone attend).
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #173 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Wed 13 Jan 10 11:10

    
Wow!  Nice, Bruce.

and from offsite reader Stefan Jones:

WOOO! bruces on a roll!

You should turn that into a *book* man. "Consuming Things."

* * *

Two contradictory things about me:

* I have a six figure salary.

* I'm a garbage picker.

Big time garbage picker. Furniture, housewares, electronics. What I
can't use, I clean up and bring to Goodwill. (More on that later.)

I live around the corner from an Intel plant. Lots of techies in my
apartment complex. When they get laid off or start having kids, they
move out and dump their computer stuff in the bin. Some of these folks
are serial upgraders. I pull two or three really good computers out of
the trash each year. Last season's model, a dual core instead of the
quad core you need to play Halo 4 so out it goes.  I fix them up and
give them to friends or co-workers.

They throw away really good cookware too. Copper bottomed stainless
steel stuff. A little bleach and scrubbing and they're as good as new.
I really love cooking with this stuff, I can really appreciate the way
it works and dig why foodies go for the high end, but oddly *I don't
know where this stuff comes from.* I'm a Target and Costco kind of
shopper, when I buy new. They sell "kitchen in a box" sets there; nice
and affordable but the non-stick coating wears off after a few years
and out it goes.

Goodwill Industries of Oregon is a wonderful outfit. They work the
other side of the Big Box distribution cycle. Their stores aren't
shabby storefronts. They gut them and refit them and have a look and
floorplan near as standardized as Wal-Mart. All bright and well
organized and non-depressing. The stuff has a color coded date tag.
When it's 2 weeks old it goes to half price, then it goes to the Thrift
Outlet where it is sold by the pound, then what isn't sold there goes
to the pulping plant, recycling center, or (in the case of clothing) a
place that compresses it into bales for sale in the developing world.
They also have drive-through donation centers, where friendly folks
empty your SUV of detritus and give you a tax receipt.

Keep on that roll

Stefan
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #174 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 10 11:20

    
That latest Brockman "World Question Center" aggregate of writings
looks pretty rich. One thing I'm getting from that and from your rant:
we're in transition to something we can't quite see yet, and we're
completely unsettled. All we have is questions. It's like we've climbed
halfway up a mountain, and there's no way to go back, but we're not
sure we can scale the peak, either. So we're talking about it, trying
to figure it out.

Maybe we all turn inward, start realizing the Bodhisattva ideal on a
massive scale.

For some reason, this makes me think of a song...

Jenny said when she was just five years old
There was nothing happening at all
Every time she puts on a radio
There was a nothin' goin' down at all, not at all
Then one fine mornin' she puts on a new york station
You know, she couldn't believe what she heard at all
She started dancin' to that fine fine music
You know her life was saved by rock 'n' roll
Despite all the amputations you know you could just go out
And dance to a rock 'n' roll station

Jenny said when she was just by five years old
You know parents gonna be the death of us all
Two tv sets and two cadillac cars -
Well you know it ain't gonna help me at all
Then one fine mornin' she turns on a new york station
She doesn't believe what she hears at all
Ooh, she started dancin' to that fine fine music
You know her life is saved by rock 'n' roll,
Despite all the computations
You could just dance to a rock 'n' roll station

And baby it was allright
And it was all right
Hey it was all right....
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #175 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 13 Jan 10 22:06

    
So the future is talking about stuff and taking photographs of it, but
hardly ever actually buying it?  Museums and libraries should do well.
Or maybe furnished apartments.

I wonder about moving companies and storage units. And a video I once
saw about the companies that remove all the abandoned furniture from
foreclosed abandoned houses. People lived there and purchased all that
stuff. They could have packed up the stuff and brought it with them, if
they thought it was worth the hassle, but they didn't. What was once
worth actually spending money on is no longer worth even the bother of
moving.

For me, the limiting factor on buying new stuff is responsibly
disposing of the old. We need a reverse Amazon.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #176 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 13 Jan 10 22:06

    
Searching on: 

"disneyla" doctorow

Results in:

Cory Doctorow: Close Enough for Rock 'n' Roll
http://www.locusmag.com/Perspectives/2010/01/cory-doctorow-close-enough-for-ro
ck-n.html
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #177 of 223: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Thu 14 Jan 10 02:23

    
great column by Doctorow!
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #178 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 10 08:30

    
*Still no snow up here in the mountain retreat.  Eerie white fogs. 
One has to wonder what the people downhill will do for water, this
spring.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #179 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 10 08:34

    
You have to wonder, re those Edge.org guys, why so many apparently
bright and foresightful people would want to climb a faith-based
mountain where you can't see the top.  I mean: suppose you go up there,
and you get snowed in, and there's nothing to eat and you become the
Donner Party?  You could eat each other with some of that-there
"mandatory potlatch" action.

*It's always hip to quote Jaron Lanier, no matter what he says:

http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/12/science/12tier.html

“It’s as if culture froze just before it became digitally open, and
all we can do now is mine the past like salvagers picking over a
garbage dump,” Mr. Lanier writes. Or, to use another of his grim
metaphors: “Creative people — the new peasants — come to resemble
animals converging on shrinking oases of old media in a depleted
desert.”
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #180 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 10 09:40

    
Does "free" mean that we no longer value creativity? It's
commoditized? What sorts of things will people pay for?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #181 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Thu 14 Jan 10 10:27

    
>In theory, public officials could deter piracy by stiffening the
penalties, but they’re aware of another crucial distinction between
online piracy and house burglary: There are a lot more homeowners than
burglars, but there are a lot more consumers of digital content than
producers of it.

The result is a problem a bit like trying to stop a mob of looters.
When the majority of people feel entitled to someone’s property, who’s
going to stand in their way?<


That is just nonsense. There is nothing our culture does better or
more ruthlessly than protecting the property of minorities from
majorities. Evidently no one cares about protecting musicians',
writers', or filmmakers' property, is all.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #182 of 223: Harmless drudge (ckridge) Thu 14 Jan 10 10:55

    
If I read right, four things are said to be changing consumerism
beyond recognition:

1. internet buying, which displaces purchasing from geographical, some
temporal, and some social limitations
2. a growing taste for inexpensive, good-enough possessions
3. displacement of work like cooking and do-it-yourself repairs from
the home, resulting in less need for equipment
4. transient modes of life, so that people select possessions that are
disposable, portable, interchangeable, and ambiguous as to status

I think that an end to consumerism as currently practiced would be a
good thing for people who like to get beautiful things, arrange them
into beautiful rooms, and play host in their beautiful rooms. It would
clear the ground. All the people who play at surrounding themselves
with nice things, would go play at something else, probably at having
the latest multi-functional electronic box in their pockets. The ones
who were left, who were serious about it, would be more able to find
one another.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #183 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 10 06:19

    
I've been thinking more about the resource limits here on spaceship
earth. I had a discussion yesterday with Donna Kidwell, who's in the
technology commercialization program at the IC Squared (IC2) Institute
at the University of Texas at Austin - it's an entrepreneurial think
tank. JaeSung Ro, an Austin entrepreneur originally from Korea, was
with us. We were talking about the future of entrepreneurs, the failure
of traditional incubation models to be effective in the digital era
where physical infrastructure support is a less compelling need, and
the impact of globalization. I found myself seeing resource and
economic distribution issues in terms of fairness and accessibility.
U.S. economic prominence, and the production of wealth here, has
depended on exploitation of human and natural resources here and
elsewhere, and as we move toward a more "fair share" distribution and
more countries come online with the means to acquire what you might
consider a more fair distribution of income and resources, it's harder
for the U.S. to dominate, possibly harder for any one country to
dominate. Given economic acceleration and market sophistication in
countries like India and China, it's inevitable that we'll see a
"decline" in the U.S., which in this context I was taking to mean that
we would have less concentration of wealth here, and a more fair
distribution of wealth globally. 

So much of history has been a limited number of wealthy people taking
money and power and using various mechanisms, from overt brute force to
propaganda, to sustain their positions. That's all still there, but
it's more global, you have the same pockets of power in other
countries... I'm seeing that as more widespread competition, more
complexity, and probably more balance (not necessarily as an intended
consequence).

People think they can take individual political positions that will
somehow be relevant to all this, but it's like thinking you can take a
position that affects the weather. Or they might think that they elect
a Barack Obama and, by the force of his intellect and personality, he
somehow addresses and channels massive complex forces at play.

When the weather's severe and intense, or when you have a massive
shifting of the earth as we just had in Haiti, the best you can do is
the best you can do. Adapt. Try to be useful. Help and protect the
people you care about. Hope that a few buildings and people will be
left standing, and that neighbors will care enough to lend a hand.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #184 of 223: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Fri 15 Jan 10 18:32

    
Luisah Teish says it the best I've ever heard:

"Do what you can.

Use what you have.

Begin where you are."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #185 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 10 03:24

    
Very faint sprinkling of snow in the mountain village.  The frozen fog
clung onto some of the vegetation, forming odd layered spray-paints of
ice.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #186 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 10 03:31

    
Very silent up here.  Getting rather a lot of fiction done.  Reading
more fiction than usual, too.  Not that I'm buying it -- I'm just
reading it.

Purchasing this stuff wouldn't help the authors much, as they've all
been dead a hundred years.

Except, that is, for Cory Doctorow.  Lugged Cory Doctorow's paper
novel MAKERS up here, now that I have a chance to get mano-a-mano with
it.

That is just one king-hell of a science fiction novel.  Nobody in the
world but him could have fabricated this amazing thing.  It reads like
it was written in 800-word Van Vogt bursts in between yoga sessions,
but man, this is the stuff.  It makes 20th century science fiction read
like antique collection.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #187 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 10 04:50

    
There would appear to be giant oceans of liquid diamond inside Uranus.
 It's gonna be hard to top that one as a closer for a State of the
World in 2010, folks.

http://news.discovery.com/space/diamond-oceans-jupiter-uranus.html
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #188 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 10 06:13

    
I, too, have a copy of _Makers_ sitting here on the left as I type
this. As you write in your book blurb, Cory's a cyberspace native. He's
seen the monsters of the noosphere's id.

We do have a few more days before we end on the 20th, and the news of
Earth 2010 has been dominated by the disastrous earthquake in Haiti -
triage, rescue and aid. They're still digging out survivors as well as
dead bodies, which are piling up in the streets. 

From the New York Times:

"Looting of houses and shops increased Friday, and anger boiled over
in unpredictable ways: residents near the city’s overfilled main
cemetery stoned a group of ambulance workers seeking to drop off more
bodies.

"Some people were bracing for the worst. Harold Marzouka, a
Haitian-American businessman who was hustling his family onto a private
jet to Miami, said he could feel the tension rising and feared that
hunger and desperation might prompt an explosion of violence."

I found myself imagining a future where much of the world is
struggling for stability after one disaster or another, and a few smart
technicians are trying to hold it together.

Earlier in the same article:

"The United States, in fact, took firmer control of the emergency
operation on Friday. After three days of chaos and congestion at the
airport in Port-au-Prince, Haiti’s government ceded control of it to
American technicians, to speed the flow of relief supplies and
personnel.

"The Federal Aviation Administration, which began managing air traffic
into Haitian airspace, issued a stern warning to allow aid to flow in
a more orderly way: no planes from the United States, military or
civilian, would be allowed to land without express permission from the
agency."
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #189 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 10 06:18

    
On a more positive note, you've got Jean Russell building a global
army of thrivability (vs mere sustainability) advocates:

"Thrivability is our path out of unsustainable practices toward a
world where all people have a high quality of life, a voice, and a
nurturing earth supporting them. Using whole systems approach, we
evolve our way of being together, of collaborating, so that our
collective wisdom and action bring forth a flourishing world and
thriving life. R. Buckminster Fuller, we believe, was right in stating:
'You never change things by fighting the existing reality. To change
something, build a new model that makes the existing model obsolete.'

"We move from the defensive position taken by sustainability into the
offensive - claiming the world we want to live in and co-creating it.
 
"A thrivable world is a world we can live into, where dynamic tension
of needs and resources supports the existence and evolution of life and
consciousness."

http://thrivable.wagn.org/wagn/About_Us
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #190 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 10 04:59

    
Much more freezing fog last night.  Looks nothing like snow, nor like
ice or frost.  Never seen the like.  Local trees, weeds, cables, fences
are deeply coated with a strange growth of gray-white, weak, powdery
fur, built up micro-droplet by microdroplet and radiating in all
directions, like a mineral deposit.  

It's not alarming or dangerous, it's quite peaceful and pretty, but
boy is it weird.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #191 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 10 05:17

    
As for the Haiti quake, I haven't much to say about the catastrophe. 
It's a big catastrophe this year, and mankind suffers many.

Haiti's of some unique interest to me because of voodoo.  Voodoo is a
thriving American folk religion.  Modern voodoo didn't really start
getting going until the 1930s, but it's on its legs now.  I haven't
done a house to house poll, but I imagine it's safe to say that voodoo
has more social respectability and more devout adherents in more
nations and ethnicities now than voodoo has ever had before.  

People take it plenty seriously, but, well, what good is it?

One has to wonder if there was even one Haitian adept who foresaw this
 quake with his magic powers, and took any coherent steps.  Like, why
wouldn't  he bundle up the dreadlocks and the Tonton Macoute
mirrorshades, and just blow town for a while?  Like maybe to Rio de
Janeiro, where they've got voodoo galore and also an Olympics?  

Was there even one wizard who was stirring the blowfish poisons and
getting ridden by his loa, and who got, like, a tip-off from Erzulie or
Baron Samedi?  Could he preserve himself, his followers, his wife, his
kids, his Mom?

Or did they just get crushed by the falling substandard concrete
blocks pretty much like everybody else?  

You'd think there'd be a certain wry Voltairean skepticism about
voodoo, like after the massive Lisbon Earthquake when Voltaire wrote
"Candide."  I don't expect one.  On the contrary, I'd expect belief in
voodoo and voodoo practices to intensify massively after this.

"What can we do now?" asked the King of Portugal after the giant
Lisbon earthquake.  "Feed the living and bury the dead," said the
bishop.  Some time-tested ecumenical advice there.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #192 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 10 05:28

    
"Thrivability is our path out of unsustainable practices toward a
world where all people have a high quality of life, a voice, and a
nurturing earth supporting them. Using whole systems approach, we
evolve our way of being together, of collaborating, so that our
collective wisdom and action bring forth a flourishing world and
thriving life. R. Buckminster Fuller, we believe, was right in
stating:
'You never change things by fighting the existing reality. To change
something, build a new model that makes the existing model obsolete.'"


*Y'know, I like Bucky Fuller rather more than the next guy, but that's
not a 'global army of thriveability."  That paragraph basically
describes the Lions' Club or the Kiwanis, except with more New Age
feminists.

Armies are not Fulleresque imaginary social movements that adjust
trimtabs by obsolescing paradigms.  Armies are huge numbers of drafted
kids led by "Unconditional Surrender" Grant who engage in some American
economic reform by levelling Richmond and setting fire to Atlanta.  

I'm a little unclear as to what Bucky's visionary gifts might have
given to a successful reform effort of that kind.  I'd be guessing he'd
be in the Union Observational Balloon Corps.

"All people have a high quality of life, a voice, and a
nurturing earth supporting them..."  I don't wanna come across like
the crackerbarrel cyberpunk cynic here, but I'm way too much of an
Andre Breton fan to put up with smooth malarkey like that.  As Andre
once asked the French Communist Party, "What about the seven year old
girl run over by a streetcar?"  Where's her "voice" and her "nurturing
earth"?  She's a blameless kid run over by a street-car. She is the
tragic dimension of life.  It happens literally every day.  

People who try to elide this fact lack a street-smart awareness of the
inherent wonder and horror of the human condition.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #193 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 10 05:47

    
http://www.welcometohr.com/wp-content/uploads/mosh1.jpg

If Norman Rockwell had been a punk instead of painting giant glazed
consumer turkeys.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #194 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 10 06:13

    
*Satan weighs in on that Haiti issue:

http://www.startribune.com/opinion/letters/81595442.html
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #195 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 17 Jan 10 07:52

    
I would've thought the concept of "thriveability" would have appealed
to you, as a design maven. Sustainable design seeks to "eliminate
negative environmental impact completely through skillful, sensitive
design" (via Wikipedia). How would that change, if we were designing to
thrive, rather than merely sustain? Sure, thriveability is heady
idealism, but that feels revolutionary given where we are. I find it
more appealing (natch) than cynical despair. 

Jean Russell wrote a post called "Facing the Abyss" in September that
addresses your point:

"Let’s imagine the arcs of the future streaming before us. To the
left, let us see the future that stems from inaction – failure to
change course. It is riddled with crisis and vast human and living
system suffering. Likely large scale migrations as one area becomes
toxic (in actuality or in energy and access to resources). Disparities
in wealth, aka access to the things we need, escalates into greater and
greater Extremistan. To the right, let us be powerfully visionary and
imagine the best possible future. Turn off the inner skeptic. Imagine
future generations enjoying natural areas and clean air, imagine
everyone having ready access to water and healthy foods, medical care,
shelter, etc, where they are free from gross conflicts and free to
pursue their passions.

"The real future is somewhere in the middle, I suspect. But, for this
thought experiment, let’s assume that one can either be a pessimist
(left) or an optimist (right).

"If I live my day to day life believing that the only possible outcome
is the future to the left, why should I take any action? Why should I
even get up in the morning? My brief life might be full of some
immediate pleasures, but it will end with no inspiring legacy and a
terrible shame that thousands and thousands of years of human evolution
collapsed in my day. Personally, choosing to believe that feels like
suicide of the spirit to me. It is all for naught. Don’t bother leaving
a sign to mark the grave.

"If I live my day to day life believing that the possibility (without
being totally blind to the brutal facts before us) – that there is some
possibility to move from the stream on the left to the stream on the
right…in my lifetime it might not be 100% to the right, but maybe 70%?
Where might it go? What might I do to move that path to the right –
toward possibilities of humans evolving in dynamic relationship to the
systems around us – toward thriving?"

Re Haiti and voodoo, Pat Robertson says voodoo actually *caused* the
earthquake, that Haitians were cursed because they've made a pact with
the devil. http://budurl.com/whatajerk

The Haitian consul general said pretty much the same thing:
http://budurl.com/anotherjerk

Of course, voodoo isn't devil-worship, but a complex religion built
around belief in a supreme being, Bondye, who is distant and
indifferent. So they have to work with the lwa (loa), which are lesser
spirits. If Pat Robertson thought about (a stretch), he'd realize
Bondye and the lwa could be his own God and tribe of angels. How many
lwa can dance on the head of pin?

Kind of a charmless fantasy, really, that earthquakes are
manifestation of supernatural intentions and not manifestations of real
instabilities in the structure of the earth - the Garden of Eden built
on shaky ground. And I suppose this applies to hurricanes, too -
surely God's wrath at the practice of voodoo in Louisiana brought
Katrina down to clean the drains.

Xenophobia in the 21st century. Monsters from the Id.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #196 of 223: Ed Ward (captward) Sun 17 Jan 10 08:54

    
In re all of this utopianism whizzing around here, I came upon this in
an article by Tony Judt that feels about right. The article is about
fear of democratic socialism, but the quote's bigger than just that. 

"If we have learned anything from the twentieth century, we should at
least have grasped that the more perfect the answer, the more
terrifying its consequences. Imperfect improvements upon unsatisfactory
circumstances are the best that we can hope for, and probably all that
we should seek. Others have spent the last three decades methodically
unraveling and destablilizing those same improvements: this should make
us much angrier than we are. It ought also to worry us, if only on
prudential grounds: Why have we been in such a hurry to tear down the
dikes laboriously set in place by our predecessors? Are we so sure that
there are no floods to come?"
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #197 of 223: Lisa Harris (lrph) Sun 17 Jan 10 10:30

    
More from offsite reader Stefan Jones:

Haiti. Kee-ripes.

A few years ago the place seemed to be top runner for being the poster
child for compassion fatigue. But now we're seeing fundraising by text
message breaking all sorts of records and George Clooney hosting a
prime-time all-network telethon. I just hope it's enough.

Haiti could really use something like the CCC. Hire young guys, haul
them up into the hills and put them to work planting forests and flood
control systems. Give them food, clothing, education and money to send
back home to mom. It would cost a hell of a lot, and it would probably
come out of my tax dollars, but I'd prefer that to paying the DEA or
Coast Guard to deal with them.

And then there's . . . how do I put this? If we can't regreen a
tropical island that has non-toxic soil and lots of rain and sunlight,
where do we get off thinking we can terraform Mars or put a working
ecosystem in an orbiting can? That's not Worldsmithing 101, it's an AP
course.

Stefan
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #198 of 223: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Sun 17 Jan 10 10:33

    
Speaking of Voodoo, there's a perceptive note in the NY Times week in
review from Madison Smartt Bell, who knows the country, about its pull
& hold on a country that has so much death:

Today is a good day to remember that in Haiti, nobody ever really
dies. The many thousands who've had the breath crushed out of their
bodies in the earthquake, and the thousands more who will not
physically survive the aftermath, will undergo instead a translation of
state, according to the precepts of Haitian Vodou, some form of which
is practiced by much of the population. Spirits of the Haitian dead —
sa nou pa we yo, those we don’t see — do not depart as in other
religions but remain extremely close to the living, invisible but
tangible, inhabiting a parallel universe on the other side of any
mirror, beneath the surface of all water, just behind the veil that
divides us from our dreams.  ....

<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/17/weekinreview/17bell.html?ref=weekinreview>
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #199 of 223: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Sun 17 Jan 10 11:31

    
ANd speaking of Tony Judt, but off the immediate topic, he has a
gorgeous, if profoundly upsetting, essay, "Night" about his descent
into Lou Gehrig's disease.

http://www.nybooks.com/articles/23531
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #200 of 223: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Sun 17 Jan 10 13:21

    
#190: we get that often this time of year in Idaho's Treasure Valley,
when we have inversions. It's really pretty.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #201 of 223: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 17 Jan 10 14:34

    
I think the thing about Haiti is that it shows the resources that can
be brought to bear on a problem, but apparently it takes a sudden
disaster to do it. You've got the U.S. Military, Red Cross, Doctors
without Borders, Partners in Health. The organizations going in are the
ones that were already prepared for this. In-kind donations are mostly
not useful to them. First response to disaster relief is up to the
people already there and professionals flown in from other countries.

Meanwhile we've got two ex-presidents shaking people down for money,
and the money is flowing in. I'm not sure how much it even matters when
the money arrives? This is at least partially about replenishing bank
accounts to prepare for the aftermath and the next crisis.

But Haiti was already a disaster before all this happened. What other
kind of signal would get this kind of response?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #202 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 17 Jan 10 15:55

    
Those are good points. I'm seeing several instances of probably
well-intentioned groups setting up initiatives to collect money "for
Haiti," though it's not always clear who exactly will receive the money
and what percentage of the money will actually be committed to Haitian
efforts. I favor avoiding mediation by other groups and giving as
directly as possible. Here's one way to do that:
http://www.standwithhaiti.org/haiti
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #203 of 223: The road to hell is paved with "pragmatism"? (robertflink) Sun 17 Jan 10 18:39

    
>People who try to elide this fact lack a street-smart awareness of
the
inherent wonder and horror of the human condition.<

>"If we have learned anything from the twentieth century, we should at
least have grasped that the more perfect the answer, the more
terrifying its consequences.<

Does this mean that idealism and ideology can't simply be justified by
good intentions?  (Talk about the end of the world as we know it!!!)
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #204 of 223: (fom) Sun 17 Jan 10 21:54

    
 >Local trees, weeds, cables, fences
  are deeply coated with a strange growth of gray-white, weak, powdery
  fur, built up micro-droplet by microdroplet and radiating in all
  directions, like a mineral deposit.

Bruce, that is rime. I forget where you are but I once took the TGV 
through France and everything was coated with rime -- it was spectacular. 
I had never seen it in the USA.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #205 of 223: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Mon 18 Jan 10 02:52

    
<I think the thing about Haiti is that it shows the resources that can
be brought to bear on a problem, but apparently it takes a sudden
disaster to do it. You've got the U.S. Military, Red Cross, Doctors
without Borders, Partners in Health.>

For all the highly trained professionals headed into Haiti, military
and otherwise, there still seems to be a lack of aid getting to the
points where it is really required. Why this is happening is a mystery
to me. It may be a lack of clear leadership (most of the UN mission and
many of Haiti's legislature were killed in the initial quake), or a
problem of logistical bottlenecking, but it's been almost a week and we
still hear stories of people not receiving water, food, and basic
medical care. 

Haiti isn't that big. It's not even all that populous, in raw numbers.
It may have complex terrain, but you'd think the international
community would have been able to overwhelm the difficulties by now. 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #206 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 10 05:27

    
<echodog>, here's some background from Friday and Monday news (BBC and
NY Times). The logistics are formidable (note the part about blocked
roads), and when aid finally does arrive on the scene, unruly mobs
form. It's chaos, internal leadership is weak if at all present.

The excerpts:

BBC, Friday:

Anjali Kwatra of UK-based charity  Action Aid,   tells the BBC World
Service: "In the first 48 hours after a disaster, it isn't
international aid that makes a difference - that usually comes in after
two or three days. It's the local people who go in, who rescue people,
who provide what food, water and shelter that they can. What we're
seeing in Haiti is that there isn't the ability to do that, because so
many people have been affected."

The BBC's Mark Doyle at the airport in Port-au-Prince says: "If some
planes are now arriving, it's far from clear how effective the
distribution of the aid may be. There are problems of coordination with
the Haitian Government, which is dysfunctional at the best of times,
and some roads are reported to be blocked by buildings toppled in the
quake."

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/8460771.stm

NY Times, today:

On the fifth day after the earthquake, there were signs of
improvement, possibly even hope that the worst was passing. Traffic at
the airport continued to increase, and there were 27 rescue teams on
the ground, with 1,500 people searching for survivors.

But the World Food Program said: “Aftershocks persist which is a
concern given the damaged infrastructure.” 

---

The military has established a priority list for providing slots,
Major Jones said. At the top are planes bringing in water. Next is
equipment for distributing supplies, followed by food and then medical
personnel and medicine.

In Port-au-Prince, the stepped-up effort appeared to be paying off and
aid was finally reaching at least some of Haiti’s desperate, with
varying degrees of order.

On Sunday morning, a United Nations truck appeared in the park near
the presidential palace, where hundreds of families have been squatting
since the earthquake. They handed out bags of water to a crowd mostly
appreciative, with only a little shoving.

The World Food Program also sent at least three convoys to different
locations badly affected by the earthquake, with a goal of delivering
enough nourishment to last 65,000 people five days.

But the scene at one delivery site suggested that the food — rations
of fortified biscuits, each one about the size of a graham cracker —
would hardly last the ravenous victims one night. And the agency’s
distribution methods nearly started a riot when throngs of people who
had lost everything mobbed one of the trucks in the convoy.

---

Mr. Ernso, a 25-year-old linguistics student, introduced himself to a
World Food Program official and suggested that it might have been more
effective if the agency had called ahead to advise community leaders
that it was coming. Then he and four other brawny young men dived into
the mob and began pulling people apart. Within five minutes the people
had been arranged in three neat lines. “They have to create another way
to deliver food,” Mr. Ernso said of the World Food Program official,
speaking in English. “The way they are doing it now, they will not help
us out of our misery

http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/19/world/americas/19haiti.html?hp
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #207 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 10 07:09

    
So, "rime."  That's quite a good word.  Never saw frozen rime before. 
I've heard of "sea-rime."  This congealed fog stuff looks very
plausibly rimey.

So, now, finally, it's begun snowing.  Snow is sifting gently over the
rime.  Not enough snow to attract any skiers yet, but, well, there's
snow in the mountains.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #208 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 10 07:18

    
*Great interview with Brian Eno.  If you've gotta listen to one
off-the-wall ultra-trendy pop-culture guru guy, make it this guy.

*I'm sure there are people around who find Brian Eno somewhat
irritating, but I never tire of this guy's pitch any more than he does.

http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2010/jan/17/brian-eno-interview-paul-morley

On the naming of things  (((A line of work I always find of particular
interest)))

"A way to make new music is to imagine looking back at the past from a
future and imagine music that could have existed but didn't.  (((Any
science fiction writer who doesn't get it about this needs another line
of work.)))

Like East African free jazz, which as far as I know does not exist. To
some extent, this was how ambient music emerged. My interest in making
music has been to create something that does not exist that I would
like to listen to, not because I wanted a job as a musician. I wanted
to hear music that had not yet happened, by putting together things
that suggested a new thing which did not yet exist. 

It's like having a ready-made formula if you are able to read it. One
of the innovations of ambient music was leaving out the idea that there
should be melody or words or a beat… so in a way that was music
designed by leaving things out – that can be a form of innovation,
knowing what to leave out. (((Blogging is journalism with the ethics,
the ink and the intellectual continuity left out.)))

All the signs were in the air all around with ambient music in the mid
1970s, and other people were doing a similar thing. I just gave it a
name. Which is exactly what it needed. A name. A name. Giving something
a name can be just the same as inventing it. By naming something you
create a difference. You say that this is now real. Names are very
important."

(((Like for instance, if you're dead, and you're a voodoo guy, you
don't actually have to be "dead," because you can name it something
else.  Oh wait, maybe that's not such a great example.)))

On hindsight

"Instead of shooting arrows at someone else's target, which I've never
been very good at, I make my own target around wherever my arrow
happens to have landed. You shoot your arrow and then you paint your
bulls eye around it, and therefore you have hit the target dead
centre."

*There's lots more.  I like all of it.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #209 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 10 07:23

    
I'm okay with the catchy term "thriveable," but rather than arguing
over how neat-o it is as a concept and how effective it is as a
reproach to the horrid status quo, I'd rather find a real-life, working
place that has Thriveability in Power.  You know, where the Thrivers
took over.  Where they're all thriveable from mayor down to dogcatcher.

Then I would wander over there to see if I could stand the regime.  So
far, it sounds a lot like certain neighborhoods in Portland.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #210 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 10 07:46

    
Speaking of certain neighborhoods in power, check this out.

Since we're all broke, politically helpless, sick, unemployed, aging
and/or evicted from our overpriced homes, while facing massive weather
crisis -- let's drive, or rather bicycle, over by the liquor store and
smoke us some legal pot!  Yeah man!  "Social tipping point!"

Just getting the concert-throngs of potheads out of the domestic gulag
and pruning back the savage narcotics decapitations in Mexico might
perk 2010 up a bit...  But what the hey, man!  *Marijuana!*  Mary Jane!
 Reefers!  Da Chronic!   A new unfiltered smoking habit is just what I
need!

*Not to mention to intrinsic rush back to woozy 70s progressive-rock
epics on vinyl... where I don't have to get out of my beanbag to go
push buttons in iTunes any more.

http://www.impactlab.com/2010/01/18/the-push-to-legalize-marijuana-on-the-west
-coast/

*Wait a sec.... this blogpost is via the WALL STREET JOURNAL?! Wall
Street legalizes marijuana, is that the sulfur smell of the pitch here?
  *Knock-knock-knock!*  Oh Rupert Murdoch!  "Mr Potter of
Pottersville!"  Is that you I hear in there next to those Lucky Strike
packaging machines?  Welcome to 2010, sir!
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #211 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 10 08:12

    
Trying to get my head around the concept of a world where Mr. Potter's
a stoner.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #212 of 223: Gail (gail) Mon 18 Jan 10 13:12

    
Perhaps its because I have somebody in my house who is recovering from
moderately minor surgery right now, but the health care stalemate
comes to mind immedately.  

So... we won't care for the boomer generation via medicare until they
are well over 65, and we won't care for those in the younger working
generations who will not get assurance of care for all.  Let's make
sure everybody can stay stoned, so they don't get riled up about
healthcare in any organized and effective way.

Simpler and more contemporary than Cointelpro or Iran-Contra drug
importation schemes to dampen social movements at home, because the
drugs can calm the populace legally, AND be taxed, too. Or am I just a
perpetual cynic?
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #213 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 10 18:17

    
I'm having a bizarre vision - Sarah Palin presiding over a nation
filled with crazyass stoned-out boomers, mostly ill and, while
treatable, unable to afford treatment; many living in streets (no more
social security payments, rents unaffordably high, home ownership
reserved for under-40s who can still get and hold jobs). Their one
consolation: marijuana's been legalized for anyone over fifty, and
offered free to anyone over fifty and ill. In-a-gadda-da-vida, baby.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #214 of 223: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Tue 19 Jan 10 00:11

    
Talk about Soylent Green!
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #215 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 10 06:42

    
That vision doesn't sound all that bizarre to me.  It's basically the
Soviet Union under Andropov, with vodka replaced with bongs.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #216 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 10 06:48

    
It's still snowing up here.  Barely.  Not near enough to impress the
locals, who pine for their legendary second-story snowdrifts in the
1980s, with Yugoslav helicopters dropping food-packs on stranded
farm-houses and diggers prospecting for buried cars as people forged
from house to house through snow-roofed tunnels.

Got a couple of inches of fluffy white stuff.  That may be enough to
bring in a few tourist buses this weekend.  I'm leaving for Belgrade
tomorrow.

The blog's got a couple of YouTube videos up on it now, from the
state-of-the-art in Serbian pop music.

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/

We're nearing the end of the tape here on the WELL (whew), but over at
BEYOND THE BEYOND, the pontification is like some endless dripping
faucet!
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #217 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 10 06:50

    
By the way, if you eat "rime," it has the exact texture and taste of
the frosty build-up inside a neglected freezer.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #218 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 19 Jan 10 11:04

    
This year's "state of the world" has been an interesting ramble.
Thanks, Bruce, and thanks to all the others who took part. 

Despite the grimness in the world around me, despite all the
distressing bits I've learned and seen over the last year, I'm feeling
up beat. There's a creative pulse beating within my world, and the
juices are flowing relentlessly into visions of innovation. Our new
company, Plutopia Productions (http://plutopiaproductions.com) -
plutopia a mashup of "pluralist utopias" - is catching all sorts of
energy and vibe from artists and makers and visionaries who won't let
the world go dismal and wrong. They're just not gonna have it. We're
planning our SXSW Interactive event, "The Science of Music
(http://plutopia.org),"; featuring DJ Spooky. It reminds me of Thomas
Pynchons "enclaves of negentropy" from _Gravity's Rainbow_.

This year will be a great party, despite everything. Let's go do great
things.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #219 of 223: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 19 Jan 10 16:46

    
Sounds good!

Thanks, Bruce.  I think there might have been some kind of confusion
about the two week span and when it was to start, and I hope that
didn't totally wear you out!  We have been lucky enough partake of your
insights and the general contact-high and counterpoint for nearly
three weeks. That's enough to make anybody upbeat even without those
Andropovian bongs.   
 
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #220 of 223: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Tue 19 Jan 10 18:04

    
And thanks for the pseud.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #221 of 223: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 20 Jan 10 08:55

    
I'm back in Belgrade now.  In a couple of days I'll be back in
Obamastan.

Global jet travel is relentless targeted by the Terror on War, and
it's also wrecking the atmosphere.  But it's really a great historical
privilege to live in an era when a human individual can see so much of
his planet.

I hope we can do this another eleven times.  It's a joy and a wonder
just to watch the parade.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #222 of 223: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 20 Jan 10 14:01

    
Amen on all counts, brother.
  

inkwell.vue.373 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2010
permalink #223 of 223: Gail (gail) Mon 25 Jan 10 12:58

    
Thank you both.
  

