inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #0 of 221: Introduction (jonl) Thu 28 Dec 17 07:41

    
Time again to kick off the new year with a two-week conversation
about the state of the world (an intentionally, perhaps comically,
broad scope of coverage, inviting a range of discussion focusing on
facts, alternative facts, more or less informed opinion, and
exploratory projection).

Your primary interlocutors:

Bruce Sterling is a futurist, journalist, science-fiction author and
design critic. He is best known for his novels and his seminal work
on the Mirrorshades anthology, which defined the cyberpunk genre. 

Jon Lebkowsky is an activist and writer/blogger focused on the
future of the Internet, digital culture, cyber liberties, media, and
society. He is currently part of the Polycot Associates digital
co-operative.

Others are invited to add questions or comments. If you're reading
this and not a member of the WELL, you can send your comment or
question to inkwell at well.com, to be posted here by one of our
hosts.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #1 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 31 Dec 17 07:50

    
2017 was a nervous year of overwrought blustery political cultures,
a year of normalized psychosis amplified by media distortion, a year
in which we all learned to live in the upside-down, losing our hats
in the process of flipping. 

Wary though I am of year-end top-ten lists, I couldn't help
assembling such a beast as a way to organize my thoughts and
generally keep track. These were the blips on my radar...

1. The normalization of deceit in US politics, melting reality into
surreality, a postmodern politics constructing "alternative facts"
and liquid narrative. Donald Trump is in the lead here
(https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2017/06/23/opinion/trumps-lies.html), and Russian propaganda engines have contributed many bits of misinformation and disinformation. Reliable, accountable news sources have been labeled "fake news," undermining the credibility of accurate news reporting vs false narratives polluting the information ecosystem. Don't get me started about Fox News (and a shout out to Shepard Smith, still trying to practice real journalism in that difficult context.)

2. Mainstreaming of fringe whack, dismissal of evidence-based
research and science, resulting potential for institutional rupture.
Alex Jones at Infowars accurately says "there's a war on for your
mind!" Hopefully Jones and his ilk aren't winning.

3. Climate change kicks into higher gear while we argue whether the
scientific consensus is just another shaggy apocalypse story, or
whether economic interests have priority over human sustainability.
Meanwhile ice caps are melting, sea levels are rising, and extreme
weather events probably related to climate change are wreaking
havoc. (I say "probably related": always important to note that
weather and climate are different but related things.)

4. The blockchain, still confusing, with use cases unclear, has
become more of an established phenomenon, even as Bitcoin seems
imperiled by the expansion of an apocalyptic bubble. Related: hard
currency is increasingly replaced by plastic cards and electronic
transactions (electronic fiat), but not so far by cryptocurrency.
Will there be meaningful and sustainable alternatives to fiat money?
See the infographic at
https://holytransaction.com/blog/2014/07/bitcoin-vs-banking-infographic.html

5. Platform Cooperativism. Emerging interest in egalitarian worker
co-operatives meets platform-based business structure (as in gig
economy platform-based powerhouses Uber and Freelancer.) Platform
co-ops have multistakeholder governance that is, as with worker
co-ops in general, more democratic and inclusive. See
https://platform.coop/about - "Platform cooperativism is a growing
international movement that builds a fairer future of work. It’s
about social justice and the bottom line. Rooted in democratic
ownership,co-op members, technologists, unionists, and freelancers
create a concrete near-future alternative to the extractive sharing
economy."

6. #MeToo: Sexual misconduct allegations against Harvey Weinstein
triggered an avalanche of similar reports by women and some men,
shining a light on a whole, previously hidden, culture of misogyny.
As a male, I was shocked to hear how widespread were sexual
aggression, objectification of women, and general insensitivity in
the 21st century. We still have some growin' up to do, obviously...

7. Net neutrality interpreted as damage, and routed around by the
Trump/Pai FCC, arguing that net neutrality rules are heavy-handed,
stifling the Internet. In fact, net neutrality was a support for
digital freecom and equality. It's not clear yeat how this will play
out: most likely result is that the Internet will be more expensive.
(See https://boingboing.net/2017/12/26/creeping-blackmail.html.)

8. UFOs get real, Oumuamua suggests a rendezvous with Rama scenario.
As the  supposed asteroid Oumuamua shot through the solar system,
its odd properties caused speculation that it might be an alien ship
or artifact. Meanwhile the government revealed a secret UFO study
program and two F-18 gun-camera UFO videos. A boon for the
credibility of UFO research, at least, though Scientific American
says "The world already knew that plenty of smart folks believe in
alien visitors, and that pilots sometimes encounter strange
phenomena in the upper atmosphere - phenomena explained by entities
other than space aliens, such as a weather balloon, a rocket launch
or even a solar eruption."
(https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-truth-about-those-alien-alloys-
in-the-new-york-times-ufo-story/) 

9. Transportation meltdown, probable ascendance of autonomous
vehicles and mass transit. The transportation infrastructure in many
parts of the world isn't up to managing the increasing load, and
individually-owned vehicles burning fossil fuels, as primary
contributors to the climate change problem, seem less sensible
(unless you're a climate change skeptic and/or fossil fuels
enthusiast). Some cities are adjusting urban infrastructure away
from support for individual vehicle traffic, and all sorts of
transportation alternatives are under consideration - even gondolas,
which do a great job of moving people up and down mountains.
Something's gotta give... I suspect a combo of increasing use of
mass transit, more "transportation on the fly" services like Car2Go,
ascendance of autonomous vehicles, and - of course - more bicycles
on the thoroughfares. 

10. Psychedelics reconsidered for therapy, especially the treatment
of depression and PTSD. When I first heard about LSD in the sixties,
it was through and account of Cary Grant's therapeutic use of
psychedelics, before hippies took it to the streets. (Grant's use
was recently documented in a Guardian article,
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/may/12/cary-grant-how-100-acid-trips-in-
tinseltown-changed-my-life-lsd-documentary) LSD and other psychedelics became class 1 drugs (i.e. illegal) via the Controlled Substances Act of 1970. This means that, in the eyes of the government, they have no accepted medical use - so your physician or psychiatrist can't prescribe LSD for therapy. However there's a renewed interest in therapeutic use: see https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/17/upshot/can-psychedelics-be-therapy-allow-re
search-to-find-out.htmls Will psychedelics be legal to prescribe in the near future?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #2 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 31 Dec 17 10:05

    
I’m in Ibiza.

Nobody parties in Ibiza in the winter.  That’s why I’m here.  I’m on
an island at work on a long, difficult novel.

Few things can bore me more than novelists blithering about their
imaginative masterworks and how much they suffer during the creative
process.  So never mind the baroque, overladen novel.  Just take it
for granted during this year’s SOTW that, if I seem breathless, it’s
because I’m dead-lifting an anvil backstage.

I figured this interregnum would and must occur; I just never knew
it would happen in Ibiza.  During last year’s speech at South By
South West, I was cheerly describing the debased state of current
affairs, and how this seemed to me to offer a golden excuse to
disconnect from my usual fevered trend-tracking and tackle some
private creative issues.  So, I did that.

I’ve abandoned my usual stomping grounds of Torino, Beograd and
Austin.  I’m rent-sharing an apartment on a small, hippified,
Spanish Mediterranean island, where I live mostly on seafood,
sausage, cheese, olives and Ecuadorian plantains.  I know there are
other creative people working on Ibiza, because I can kinda smell
‘em, but I’ve got nothing to do with ‘em.  I’ve got it figured that,
just like me, they mostly hide out from the tourists.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #3 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 31 Dec 17 10:06

    

I’ve grown rather fond of Ibizan culture, meaning the lifestyle of
the actual Ibizans who stay here, rather than the trampling,
sequin-clad, globalist hordes who arrive by ferry, jet and private
yacht.  If you were, like, Spanish and born under Franco, it must
have been discombobulating to realize that your modest island was
gonna get culturally dominated, more or less forever,  by disco
dancers.  But the Ibizans show an admirable dignity about that
prospect.  They don’t vividly despise the uncouth invaders to the
point of near-mania, like their maddened, radical cousins over in
nearby Barcelona.  

The Ibizans can’t do much to “take back control” Brexit style (or
Catalonia-style) — because they’re like some island-bound Captain
Cook swamped by vast hordes of hula-dancers.  But it’s genteel here
in Ibiza. It seems okay.  Even though the harbor is infested with
foreign billionaires on big yachts, and while many local Spaniards
are clearly shattered by the finance crisis and dirt-poor, there’s
no class warfare.  No sirens, no barbed wire, few videocams, no
gunfire and ambulances.  

There’s one corner downtown where three or four token lunatics hang
out on cardboard, strung-out and begging.  Sometimes one of them
bellows old Bob Marley lyrics.  Even they don’t spoil the general
mood much, as the cops seem to leave them on exhibit there as some 
public lesson not to overdo it on the party pills. 

So, for a couple more weeks, for the extent of the yearly Inkwell
show here,  the state of my world  is Ibiza and The Well.  That’s 
kinda okay. They’ve clearly got some commonalities.   It may be
rather somnolent, old-hippie territory, but I can see that my future
golden years may contain a lot of experience of this kind.  I don’t
mind that. Should it happen, I know I’d be lucky.

Nice to be here, folks.  Thanks for dropping by.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #4 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 31 Dec 17 10:07

    

With that groundwork established, well, I’ve got broadband in
Lotusland.  Smoking hot Ibiza broadband, even.  So there are certain
worldly issues that I must pursue, for fear of missing out.

For 2018, two of ‘em are Dubai and Estonia.  I can’t watch the whole
world while writing fiction — and the whole world watches me now,
frankly, it’s burningly keen on the customer surveillance and snipes
at me with targeted data.  But Dubai and Estonia are two places
about the size of Ibiza.  Two dinky little niches in odd corners of
the world.  Yet they’re both bone-level convinced that they are
Futurity.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #5 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 31 Dec 17 10:07

    

I don’t believe either of them, but I’m always interested in people
who make that claim — “We’re the future.”  They’re not resentful in
Dubai or Estonia, they’re not looking backward; that’s what I
appreciate.   They don’t yearn to make themselves great again,
because they’ve never been great.  They’re not trying to take back
control of anything, because they never had any control.  

Both Dubai and Estonia are in situations that, looked at
objectively, are just chock-full of bloodthirsty menace.  Estonia
was crushed to paste by both Nazis and Stalinists, and Muslim
fundies would cheerfully behead every soul in Dubai.

Yet boy, are they perky.  It’s weird how upbeat, shiny, and
future-evangelical they both are.  Dubai and Estonia, these tiny
countries, say and do things that look like they come from two other
planets.  I’m waiting for the day when they announce an alliance.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #6 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 31 Dec 17 11:19

    
Toggl, the timekeeping app, is a tool I use daily, and I imagined
for the longest time that it was a Bay Area startup. A Toggl staffer
with the title "Customer Experience Optimizer" asked me for a face
to face meeting, and as we were sipping coffee and talking use
cases, I learned that Toggl is based in Estonia - she was touring
the USA, where I assume most of their customers reside. Turns out
Estonia is "tech powerhouse," per Fortune mag:
http://fortune.com/2017/04/27/estonia-digital-life-tech-startups/
"Estonia offers a glimpse into what happens when a country abandons
old analog systems and opts to run completely online instead." It's
"the first country in the world to declare Internet access a basic
human right." I'm ready to book a flight...
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #7 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 31 Dec 17 21:31

    
And Estonia allows digital citizenship!!! E-Residency....been a
member for 2 years.....cool idea

Dubai, geez, I have been watching Internet City almost from its
inception. Now, THAT is the future....or at least one, which most
definitely, will be taking place here on good old planet Earth....

Throw in trillions in oil dough, and two expanding new
markets...dash of fundamentalism and the sure knowledge of knowing
you are right!!, and you've got yourself a good ole fashion
war....whoppee, we're all gonna die....Country Joe aside, folks seem
to think that 2017 was soooo bad, it couldn't possibly get
worse....well, I'm here to tell you, you ain't seen notin' yet
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #8 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 1 Jan 18 08:39

    
Yeah, the e-residency E-Stonian thing interests me a lot, because
it’s such a weird and deliberate hack of the European immigration
problem.

Nations always “stand with” oppressed populations, but no nation
really wants its population to physically stand next to migrants. 
Nobody abolishes passports and flings out the welcome mat for the
planet’s sixty million refugees. 

 Even millionaire migrants, like the ones who flock to Ibiza here,
seem to be getting more problematic, in strange ways.  

It’s not just that the locals resent them; they do a little bit, but
interestingly, the tourists don’t seem to like each other very much
any more.  They get off the boats, make a few discos while looking
at screens, then get back on the boats.  And those are the
foreigners who cheerfully throw money around, instead of arriving
with belt-bombs full of nails, to go stand somewhere in a crowd.

With e-residency, you’ve got the Estonians trying to play financial
games with this new psychological situation somehow.  They’re not
creating a common offshore money-laundry, they’re aiming for
technically talented Koreans, Ukrainians and such, who are using
Estonia as a national cloud and a business services platform.  And
to get Euros and bank them.

There’s no pretense at all that “e-residents” are gonna integrate
into Estonian society, or learn their impossible language, or ever
live there, or even visit there.  But it is an Estonian soft-power
emanation.  They seem to see it as some shareable aspect of their
own predicament.  “Would you, too, like to be Estonian?  Well, this
is as Estonian as we can possibly make you, without getting sticky
stuff on us.  Also: probably Russian-proof!”

The guys who run the e-residency program, who are Estonian
government officials, are just a small cluster of wacky 30-something
coders who work out of an old wrecked bakery.  The offices of WHOLE
EARTH REVIEW used to look better than their offices do.

Estonia also seems to be keen on national outer-space initiatives,
which is endearingly Space Age of them.  There aren’t many of them,
but they’ve got charisma.  Sometimes that’s all it takes.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #9 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 1 Jan 18 08:40

    
They've also been babbling about an Estonian cryptocoin lately, but,
well, everybody says that this season.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #10 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 1 Jan 18 11:28

    
And Estonia allows digital citizenship!!! E-Residency....been a
member for 2 years.....cool idea

Dubai, geez, I have been watching Internet City almost from its
inception. Now, THAT is the future....or at least one, which most
definitely, will be taking place here on good old planet Earth....

Throw in trillions in oil dough, and two expanding new
markets...dash of fundamentalism and the sure knowledge of knowing
you are right!!, and you've got yourself a good ole fashion
war....whoppee, we're all gonna die....Country Joe aside, folks seem
to think that 2017 was soooo bad, it couldn't possibly get
worse....well, I'm here to tell you, you ain't seen notin' yet
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #11 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 1 Jan 18 11:30

    
Adding to Jon's list....let's not forget there is an opiod crisis,
here in the US of A. Don't know how the rest of the world is faring
drug-wise....Bruce, observaitons???


Re Estonia...I look forward to visiting my E mother country...when I
get back from Asgardia....you can even join imaginary countries in
outer reaches of the galaxy, AND BEYOND !!1  Buzz Lightyear goes
digital...

Seems like everyone is doing everything, except for having a real
life.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #12 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:42

    
As I’m staying here in Ibiza, I ponder its relationship to Puerto
Rico, which is another small, yet significantly modern place, like
Estonia and Dubai.  

Ibiza and Puerto Rico may seem polar opposites, since one of them is
widely known as a rich guy’s playground and the other is
half-prostrate with the worst electrical blackout in American
history.

Parts of Puerto Rico look quite like Ibiza, though.  Puerto Rico is
prettier than Ibiza,   it’s the “mountainous tropical fishing
paradise,” it abounds in luxury hotels.  Imagining privileged chunks
of Puerto Rico as recreational Ibiza is no stretch at all.

Imagining Ibiza as Puerto Rico is a grimmer prospect, but Ibiza does
have some small, decrepit inland villages that are pretty shabby. 
Spanish separatist political trouble could impoverish Ibiza
overnight.  Even a fuel embargo, or a shutdown of air travel, could
bring hard economic times in a hurry.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #13 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:43

    
Ibiza won’t get huge hurricanes like Puerto Rico, but Spain suffers
bad droughts and big wildfires as the parched climate of the Maghreb
moves north into the Mediterranean.   There’s not a whole lot to
burn here in ibiza, but Ibiza’s got a dense hillside scrub that
looks quite like Southern California.

Los Angeles is better off than Puerto Rico is, despite the Thomas
Fire, the largest wildfire in Californian history.  I’m thinking
that’s mostly about California’s disaster-response logistics.  If
Los Angeles had the infrastructure of Puerto Rico, the city would
have been aflame this year.  L.A. would have burned like San
Francisco in 1906.

If Houston had the infrastructure of Puerto Rico, Texans would have
despaired from Houston’s massive hurricane  floods of 2017. 
Houstonians would be leaving Houston in droves, much like Puerto
Ricans are leaving.    Puerto Rico is what America looks like when
America can’t mechanize its way out of climate crisis.  The scene is
bad there, not because Puerto Rico is unique, but because it’s a
harbinger.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #14 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:43

    
A political crisis for a small place like Ibiza — just remove the
money, shelter and logistical resources of a nation-state — might 
mean a crushing blow from climate-crisis unnatural disaster.  It’s
not just that “poor people suffer most,” it’s that becoming poor, or
even just becoming small, or forgotten, can throw you into
accelerated danger from the advancing scope of the trouble that
threatens everybody.  

This cruel aspect of modern geopolitics may be underestimated.  If
you’re a micro-state, a failed state, a frozen conflict zone, people
may have the ability to bail you out from the planet’s general
troubles, but would they bother?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #15 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:43

    

We stayed in Sardinia this year while the island was on fire in a
drought.  We worried about that, and thought maybe it would be more
sensible to stay in Torino.  It turned out that the Alpine valley
forests upwind of Torino were also on fire, later the same year. 
And boy, did that Alpine wood burn.  It burned far worse than
Sardinia.  Downtown skies in Torino turned leaden gray with smoke,
California style.

The Turinese made a lot of alarmed Puerto Rico noise during their
emergency — “Where are the fire trucks, where are the fire
helicopters?  Don’t we pay taxes?  Have you forgotten us?”  

Well, those advanced machines do exist, but they’re pretty busy
elsewhere.  You see, nobody ever thought you would need that many. 
Why don’t you just drag yourself out of global trouble with your own
local bootstraps?  Everybody thinks that about the other
complainers.  Until it happens to them.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #16 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:49

    
I'm also quite the fan of "Asgardia the Space Kingdom," though it's
basically one guy using a small satellite to write a glorious
fantasy narrative for himself.  I've read worse science fiction
novels than "Asgardia the Space Kingdom," but Stanislaw Lem would
have briskly polished off the notion of Asgardia in about four
pages.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #17 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 10:56

    
https://asgardia.space/en/

*That's "Asgardia," for those who haven't yet seen it.  It's kinda
the Juicero of space colonization.  

For what it's worth, I think "Dr. Igor Ashurbeyli" is quite sincere;
he's not some Initial Coin Offering huckster, he's more like a
Tsiolkovsky visionary with enough cash to build himself a spaceship
in a bottle.  

I kind of envy his enthusiasm, actually.  It can be fun to be Don
Quixote, as long as the windmills don't crack your poor head like an
egg.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #18 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 18 11:16

    
*Everything Estonia thinks you need to know to start your own
Estonian E-Residency.

https://medium.com/e-residency-blog/heres-how-you-can-create-an-eu-company-wit
h-eu-banking-anywhere-on-earth-cbba47386489
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #19 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 2 Jan 18 11:21

    
11. Work still has no future.

The expectation that someone who is willing can get an honest day's
pay for an honest day's work has broken down. There's a huge power
imbalance in favor of the "job creators" who would prefer to create
wealth in ways that create as few well-paying jobs as possible.

When we talk about this in terms of the GINI coefficient we focus on
what's going on in the upper three quintiles of the wealth and
income distributions. The lower quintiles are where we're creating a
permanent underclass that lacks economic choices (including the
ability to move to take a new job), health care, education, and a
stable future.

The opioid crisis is an emergent feature of this breakdown of the
social contract. So is economic stagnation, now that the US economy
isn't driven by consumer spending from the working class.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #20 of 221: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 11:47

    
This conversation is world-readable via this link:
http://bit.ly/SOTW2018

Readers who have a burning desire to add a comment or question, but
are not members of the WELL, can send to inkwell at well.com, and
we'll post here (within reason).
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #21 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 13:53

    
Austin, Texas, where I live, has what's often called a "vibrant
economy," a lot of wealthy people, high employment, culture on
steroids, very little to complain about, aside from the persistent
and frustrating transportation gridlock.  When you live in an urban
center like Austin, you're going to be out of touch with the
problems of smaller cities and towns where economies are barely
propped up, and jobs are scarce. As are "job creators," in those
smaller towns.

Department stores are shutting down in Hermitage, Pennsylvania:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/first-this-town-lost-its-macys-
then-sears-now-all-eyes-were-on-jc-penney/2018/01/01/644ea4a2-ecb7-11e7-b698-9
1d4e35920a3_story.html?utm_term=.f59725e43172  Imagine how you'd feel if all the major retail outlets in your city started disappearing, especially if retail is the third largest employer.

Trump won the presidency (narrowly) by speaking to voters in towns
like Hermitage, and convincing him that he has their back. He
doesn't, of course - I don't think anybody does, right or left.
Bernie Sanders, maybe, or Elizabeth Warren... but I suspect even
those two are out of touch.

And a storm is coming.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #22 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 15:05

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 2 Jan 18 20:26>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #23 of 221: Jon Lebkows (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 15:05

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 2 Jan 18 20:27>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #24 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 20:42

    
Libertarians have been energized in the Trump era - as CNN wrote
(http://www.cnn.com/2017/07/24/politics/being-moody-libertarians-freedomfest/in
dex.html), they're sensing opportunity despite skepticism about Trump the man, and the power of the presidency. He's promising to shrink government, and to libertarians big government is the problem.

I've worked with libertarians, especially around net.activism, but I
don't have much depth with libertarian thinking. But I thought it
was important to add a libertarian perspective to this latest "state
of the world." To that end, I asked my friend John Papola, a very
smart guy and vocal libertarian, to contribute something. I'm
posting it below.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #25 of 221: John Papola (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 18 20:43

    
Jon asked me to weigh in with my thoughts on the state of the world
as a vocal classical liberal / libertarian. There’s a lot to be
thankful for in 2018. Despite popular misconceptions, absolute
poverty is declining worldwide and has been for over 40 years.
Global equality both under the law and as a matter of real
consumption and quality of life is increasing. By every measure of
welfare we can attempt to quantify, things are heading in an
incredible direction. And yet, we have the rise of ethnic
nationalism, protectionism, and sympathies for “socialism” which
are, to quote Friedrich Hayek “simply a re-assertion of that tribal
ethics whose gradual weakening had made an approach to the great
society possible”. 

What accounts for this bizarre disparity?

Like any complex problem, the causes are many. Our rural-urban
cultural divides are more stark than ever. Our education systems
aren’t preparing graduates for a rapidly changing world. The costs
of physical mobility are rising. In the face of all these forces,
it’s time we acknowledge the fact that our expectations of the
political process have long outpaced its inherent ability to
deliver. We wait for government to offer solutions it won’t and
can’t provide. In far too many instances, government policy is a
root cause of our problems or making existing problems worse. And
yet we have been conflating society and the state for so long that
most people can no longer tell the difference between the two.
People look to the President of the United States not as a person
with an important but limited and particular job, but as a god-like
emperor. All outcomes in our massive, complex society are
attributing to him/her. Economic growth. Jobs. Individual happiness.
The moral character of “the nation”. All are attributed, for good or
ill, to the executive.

Such grandiose talk has always been with us, but as the role of the
state has grown larger and more complex, the difference between this
linguistic fiction and actual reality has become more jarring. No
president or party can measure up. Political promises have grown to
match expectations for god-like power, but the capability of our
politics, of government as an institution, to deliver hasn’t. It
can’t. And so our politics oscillates from one increasing
disappointment to another, with our culture dividing itself along
political lines with increasing intensity as a result. Trump.
Sanders. Brexit. Le Pen. These are symptoms of our unrealistic
expectations.

Why can’t politics/government deliver?

Today, we’re faced with the political equivalent of Brook’s law,
which states that adding even more people to a late software project
actually makes it later, rather than speeding up development. We’re
long past negative marginal returns on the state. And the reasons
why are multifold. 

The most fundamental flaw in centralized command-and-control systems
like very large firms and governments is the knowledge problem.
Knowledge exists in individual minds and is particular to time and
place. Central planners simply can’t gather and process the massive
amount of particular insights necessary to create centralized
solutions with anywhere near the customization or effectiveness of
decentralized ones. This is a big problem in large firms but it’s
made far bigger and more fragile at the governmental level.
Efficient planning at national-scale takes more than angels, it
takes omnipotent gods. And even then, one size will rarely fit all.
Decentralization isn’t perfect nor appropriate in every single
instance, but in most cases its a superior approach. 




The second problem is accountability. The single greatest regulator
of behavior is the ability of one party to walk away. Abusive
relationships are sustained by the abused party’s belief (or
reality) that they can’t leave. A company’s quality of service tends
to directly correlate with how easily its customers can shop
elsewhere. For this reason, I define freedom as the inverse of the
cost of exiting an undesirable situation. We’re more free to leave a
bad job, than leave a bad country. Competition and the ability to
exit are the best form of accountability we’ve got. Voicing your
opinion is, at best, a crude and sloppy second. Just ask an
unsatisfied parent leaving a public school board meeting if voice
matches exit. Or ask a 2016 voter. 

Along similar lines, government’s weak accountability leads to a
perverse response to failure. Politics in practice tends to reward
failure rather than learn from it. It’s called the ratchet effect.
Few things in life are more permanent than a government program.
Failed programs and agencies more often than not end up being given
larger budgets and even more responsibility. The department of
education has seen its budget and power grow decade after decade
even though it’s impact on educational outcomes appears to be zero
(and in many cases negative, like the collapse of discourse and due
process on college campuses). 

Because of these forces, the tragic history of well-intended
progressive reform has been to build an administrative state that
stifles competition, empowers the politically connected and induces
the very inequities the reformers are seeking to alleviate.
Economist Bruce Yandle calls this the “bootlegger and baptist”
dynamic. The baptists want prohibition to end a scourge of
socially-destructive drunkenness. The bootleggers support it because
it will restrict supply and line their pockets with ill-gotten
profits. This is why the most heavily regulated industries end up
being the most oligopolistic and consumer-hostile (healthcare,
finance, transportation, K-12 education, etc). Airline executives
long for the era of the Civil Aeronautics Board for a reason.(see:
https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2011/12/09/143466204/the-friday-podcast-the
-nasty-rotten-airline-business)

Okay, so what are we to do about it? 

Let’s stop expecting politics to solve all our problems. It can’t.
Presidents don’t “run the economy” so let’s stop talking about it as
if they do. Society is not the state, so let’s stop treating those
of us opposed to political “solutions” to problems as if we’re
therefore, ipso facto against any solution at all. But this reality
also means that each of us needs to embrace being a problem solver
with more vigor than ever. If you’re passionate about a problem,
make it your business to solve it, not just figuratively but
literally. 

Where politics has failed, business can succeed.
 
For example, in America, few subjects cause more political conflict
than how to educate our children. Our current system has deep
problems that are leaving increasing numbers of kids ill prepared
for our changing world, especially for the poorest communities. And
yet our K-12 is monopolized by political solutions, largely in the
name of providing access to the poor. There’s another way. As James
Tooley documented in his incredible book “The Beautiful Tree”, many
of the poorest children on earth in communities from India to Africa
to the Middle East are currently being educated more effectively by
private schools than the free government alternatives. Up to 70% of
families living on as little as $2 a day in India and elsewhere are
choosing to send their kids to a private school run by an
entrepreneur (often an accidental one who began as a tutor) instead
of the free government school. This is just one example, but I
believe it’s one of the most striking.

If people in the poorest communities in India can step in to provide
a business alternative to a broken political government education
system, surely Americans can too for just about everything. It’s
time to expand our conception of the purpose and definition of
business. Business isn’t merely a profit-maximizing endeavor.
Business can and should be our process of discovering sustainable
solutions. Why? Because business is the most social process we have.
Because at its best, business is about serving others. Return on
investment is an important scorecard but hardly the only one.
Private charities are businesses organized around alternative ROI
and revenue models. The old adage, that every business is a people
business is true. It’s about conserving resources and maximizing
value created. It’s about trial and error. Most individual
businesses fail and that process is the core of why business as a
method and a process succeeds. 

Business solutions can even heal our tribal divides. Business as a
process doesn’t care about your ideology or your creed, your race or
your gender, except as an opportunity to offer something unique. It
busts through tribes and borders to expand the market and punishes
our natural bigotry with quick competition. Throughout history,
global commerce has been an engine for overcoming xenophobia and
expanding our horizons. I hate you. I trade with you. I learn that
you’re a person too. I don’t hate you as much. Where businesses
finds a reason to discriminate, it is more often than not in the
name of super-serving a particular rather than excluding one. Where
it is purely a reflection of an owner’s tribal prejudice,
competition and reputation stand ready to punish them. 

Where political solutions necessarily create winners and losers,
businesses can and do co-exist solving the same problems for
different people with different needs in different ways. I’m a Mac
user. If computer choice worked like political “choice”, I would be
forced to use a PC and resent the 90% majority of PC users for
imposing it on me. Business enables Mac and PC to co-exist and even
get along just fine over family Christmas dinner.

No system is perfect and no complex problem has a singular solution.
The task of human progress is one of continual evolution and
adaptation. Our institutions should be up to the task. It’s time to
make society our business.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #26 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 3 Jan 18 00:56

    
There are a number of problems with this sunny view.  

First, businesses are abstract entities which can and often do
reflect the priorities of the people who run them - for better and
often for worse.  In the theory presented above, bad actors would be
sorted out by Mr. Market, aka the collective will of the community. 
In real life, it's not always that simple.  I think most of us know
people in business who thrive despite (or because of) a constant
dedication to oppressing their employees and taking advantage of
their customers.

Second, once they reach a sufficient scale, businesses are just as
capable as governments at transforming themselves into unaccountable
bureaucracies (think: airlines).

Third, there are some things governments can do very well.  To pick
up on the airline thought, we just made it through a year with 0
fatalities in scheduled passenger service.  Why?  There are a bunch
of reasons, including better technology, but the key factor is a
decades-long effort by faceless government bureaucrats to
investigate and brilliantly analyze the causes of every serious
aviation accident and then to crack the whip for improvements. 
Since nobody likes plane crashes, what they say pretty much goes. 
And in areas where the safety bureaucrats have less sway (e.g.
passenger rail service) things are less happy.

Fourth, there's the "if government didn't exist, business would
invent it" factor.  For example, the government has established a
climate where bankers and CEOs are immune from criminal law and can
pretty much lie, cheat, and steal at will (unless they steal from
other rich people). But is that the government's fault?  Did anyone
reading this vote for criminal immunity for banksters?  And while
it's true that finance and pharma don't care about your race,
gender, or sexual preferences, how exactly does that help us deal
with a society which is becoming more unequal and undemocratic by
the day?

What's my solution?  There isn't one.  There's no grand perfect
theory that will sort everything out.  There are only inelegant
things you can do which will satisfy no theorist, but will make
things better for ordinary people day to day - a mix of markets and
government regulation hopefully disciplined ultimately by the will
of the public. And when government is largely captured by the 1%? 
That's a tough one, and one of the reasons every previous
civilization has collapsed.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #27 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 18 04:33

    
*Still somehow doubting that you ought to become virtually Estonian
(instead of a time-honored WELLbeing)?  Just look at the 22K others
who made the leap in 2017!

https://news.err.ee/651938/nearly-22-000-new-businesses-registered-in-estonia-
in-2017
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #28 of 221: Kieran O'Niell (jonl) Wed 3 Jan 18 05:47

    
Via email from Kieran O'Neill:

Speaking of tracking and targeting, what's interested me this year
has been the emerging stories of weaponized data science being
deployed by both the Brexit and Trump campaigns. Facebook
microtargeting has been around for a while, and getting steadily
more precise, but until the past year or two I don't feel like I'd
seen a killer app for it. Apparently the killer app is to combine it
with deep polling information and feed that to troll farms to
suppress voting and steal elections.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #29 of 221: Alberto Cottica (jonl) Wed 3 Jan 18 05:49

    
Via email from Alberto Cottica:

Greetings to Bruce, John and all WELLers! Thank you for making SOTW
2018.

I would be curious for comments on Brexit. It seems to me that the
way Brexit is playing out also illuminates part of the future. The
British establishment keeps going through major oh-shit moments:
"Wait, do we have to put up a border in Northern Ireland now? Wait,
what about Gibraltar? Wait, we are only members of the WTO through
the EU!" Meanwhile the society is divided into two tribes that hate
each other's guts, even though neither existed before the
referendum. 

It is surreal. It reminds me of politics as depicted in Bruce's
novel "Distraction". 

It seems there is a lesson here, about how entangled we are in
global legal and economic superstructures, and how the Westphalian
state might no longer be viable. What are you guys seeing?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #30 of 221: Christopher Brown (brownatx) Wed 3 Jan 18 05:57

    
Last night I came across a 1982 essay by Carlos Fuentes, "Writing in
Time." It opens with a story of getting lost in rural Mexico and
asking the name of a village he and his gringo friends had stumbled
into. A local tells them it depends—they call the village Santa
Maria in times of peace, and Zapata in times of war—revealing to
Fuentes "that there is more than one time in the world...than the
linear calendars of the West." Fuentes then expresses his concern
that the "future" trajectory visible from 1982 is one of the end of
time—a concern that seems prescient from the vantage of today.
https://democracyjournalarchive.files.wordpress.com/2015/06/fuentes_writing-in
-time-democracy-2-1_-jan-1982.pdf

It reminded me of Bruce's still-fresh 2010 talk on "Atemporality for
the Creative Artist," a trenchant riff on how network culture has
obliterated linear historical narrative. 
https://www.wired.com/2010/02/atemporality-for-the-creative-artist/

The failure of Soviet-style state socialism at the moment Fukuyama
aptly dubbed the "End of History" ended a long thread of utopian
political theory going back to the likes of Fourier and Saint-Simon
that provided a progressive dipole to pragmatic conservatism—the
idea of an aspirational future for which our politics should strive.
No new grand theory of a beautiful tomorrow has emerged to replace
it, unless you count the cybertopian visions of the Long Boom that
have been fully conquered by capital (atemporal islands like this
forum notwithstanding). The election of Trump is the almost
self-parodic culmination of this thread—a stake in the heart of the
idea of the future. The question is whether it will be the catalyst
that births some new vision of what a better tomorrow looks like—a
new politics that gets past the old-fashioned idea of progress at
the heart of the "progressive."

Any such vision will need to grapple with Walter Scheidel's
revelations in *The Great Leveler (2017), which looks at a long span
to conclude that the only historically viable remedy for immense
economic inequality is the massive destruction of wealth through
war, revolution or pandemic:
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/mar/29/the-great-leveller-walter-scheid
el-review-paul-mason

And the cogent arguments of James Scott in *Against the Grain
(2017), which concludes that Homo sapiens got off track when we
started farming and settling city-states:
https://www.lrb.co.uk/v39/n23/steven-mithen/why-did-we-start-farming
 
Fuentes argues that the narrative mode of the novel contains the
keys to the sort of reinvention of perception needed to navigate
atemporality. As one who finds himself writing science fiction
novels in a world without a future, I think he's right at least in
thinking that the personal experiential starting point of narrative
is more fruitful territory than the whiteboard. Too bad network
culture also appropriated the idea of time—though that piece Jon
posted yesterday about life hacking your way to reading more books
was a good one to start the year with.
https://qz.com/895101/in-the-time-you-spend-on-social-media-each-year-you-coul
d-read-200-books/  
 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #31 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 3 Jan 18 06:11

    
Alberto, I see an ascendance of extremist political operators and
legislators who've been marginalized and watching from the sidelines
until recently. 

They were marginalized because sane and reasonable professional
politicians wouldn't give them the floor, and sane and reasonable
media gave them no coverage or platform. 

Partly due to the open Internet, and partly due to the mainstreaming
of their voices via emerging news organizations with extreme
political views, they now have a platform and a power base. We have
more extremists in politics, and fewer pragmatic moderates or
centrists. In fact, centrists are running for cover. Tribal wars are
meanwhile catching fire, fueled by conflicting belief systems.

I have always advocated for an open Internet, but many of us who do
so have argued the responsibility of citizens to develop digital
literacy. Trump's win, and I suspect the Brexit vote, were driven by
weaponized propaganda memes lobbed into the information ecosystem. 

"... two tribes that hate each other's guts..." - they're in
chambers echoing their belief systems, ignoring each other. That's a
critical problem. Not fixable without mutual respect and real
conversation.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #32 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 18 10:05

    
After lavishing some attention on Estonia, I should probably say a
few words about my current interest in Dubai.

People think they must have it easy because they’ve got a ton of
oil, but in fact, they don’t.  Not any more.  Oil’s maybe five
percent of Dubai’s economy now, while the rest is infrastructure,
shopping, tourism and some profitable safe-haven activities in a
horribly troubled region.

Saudi Arabia’s got a megaton of oil, they’re in all kinds of trouble
now.  Qatar has a ton of oil, but Qatar decided to back the Arab
Spring.  Qatar, it seems, was trying to do politically what Dubai
does mostly with hardware.  

Now Qatar suffering from all kinds of vicious new enemies, while
Dubai, which is one of the United Arab Emirates, isn’t even a
“country.”  Dubai's mostly a giant airport, skyscraper farm and
regional shopping mall.  
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #33 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 18 10:06

    


Dubai has a “Minister of Tolerance,” who's in charge of keeping the
fundies muzzled, and also a “Minister of Happiness.”   This second
functionary is a woman, Ohoud Bint Khalfan Al Roumi, the "Minister
of State for Happiness and Wellbeing".  She always has her hair
completely covered in a Dubai-style “abaya” hood, while wearing also
full make-up; foundation, mascara and bright red lipstick.  

The always-happy Minister Ohoud emits relentlessly cheery
morale-boosting English-language pronouncements, such as “As 2017
comes to an end, we look back with pride & gratitude at the many
great achievements of the #YearofGiving. We also look forward to an
even greater 2018 which marks the #YearofZayed, and wish people of
our nation & the world a year full of happiness, wellbeing &
prosperity.”

I wouldn't say that Madame Minister (if that's her proper title) is
alarmingly weird to me or anything. I tend to check up on her every
few weeks to see if her smiling facade has cracked and some other
darker reality has appeared.  Nope.  Not a bit of it.  It's been
ages now.  Clearly that's pretty much the reality on the ground in
Dubai.  They're doing great at that, with that happiness with a
smile charm offensive,  while the people around them are rioting,
purging each other and dropping like flies.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #34 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 18 10:09

    

Dubai is "the nicest place to live in the Middle East."  Most
everybody who ought to know agrees about that.  Their nation is 85
percent foreigners. Not all of 'em are having a good time, because a
lot of them are stateless underclass construction coolies, but even
they don't seem eager to go back to the hazardous miseries where
they came from.

I could go on, but I'll summarize by declaring them an avant-garde
of planetary strangeness.  Nobody seems to be holding them back, so
I think they're gonna get quite a lot more like they already are. 
So when they claim to "be the future," and they're very ambitious
about those declarations, they're also carrying that self-promoting
strategy out.  

I wouldn't want to be one of 'em, but they're doing strange,
innovative things that other people, including me, can't outguess or
dismiss.  That's why I pay attention to Dubai.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #35 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 18 10:15

    
*Oh yeah.  I might also mention Omar Sultan Alolama, the "Minister
of State for Artificial Intelligence at the Government of the United
Arab Emirates."  Minister Omar really likes hanging out with Sergey
Brin.  What the heck is that all about?  Well, maybe soon I'll know.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #36 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 3 Jan 18 16:10

    
Re #27, yup, I have three in a shell over there....the problem, at
the moment, is that you still have to pay U.S. taxes....they are
working that out....once they do, and Digital Estonia becomes a
"free enterprise zone", it should gather steam
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #37 of 221: John Papola (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 18 07:59

    
John Papola sent this response to Mark McDonough:

Thanks for the thoughtful reply. Here’s my responses:

First, all groups are in a linguistic and practical sense “abstract
entities”. Businesses, Governments, Families, etc. The only agent
with the power of thought, belief and conscious choice is an
individual person. And people come in all flavors and ethical
propensities. Bad people can do bad things in any system or
organization. What I’m arguing is that, in fact, competitive
business does the best job of providing a SYSTEMATIC check on bad
behavior. I’m leaning on a simple, utilitarian version of “bad
behavior” here where bad means making people in the aggregate worse
off (theft, fraud, rent-seeking, etc). 

You’re calling this “Mr. Market” and defining that as “the
collective will of the community”. I challenge that framework. There
is no “Mr. Market” and there’s no such thing as “collective will”.
These are shorthand linguistic fictions that cloud our thinking
about the process. Only individuals have will. Outcomes at the group
level are emergent phenomena that are impacted by the formal and
informal rules of the group. As I wrote, I believe that “right to
exit and for anyone to offer an alternative” is in almost all cases
a better ruleset than “51% of votes of who shows up at the booth
regardless of their actual skin in the outcome”. 

I’m arguing that the nature of systematic incentives in politics
tends to bring out worse qualities in people and it’s monopoly power
enables them to do far more damage. Governments lie us in to war.
There’s hardly anything comparable for us to fear from private
business. I agree that large companies can quickly become
bureaucratic. I worked at Viacom for 12+ years. But competition and
the need to be independently sustainable is a check against that
bureaucratic bloat in business. No such check exists in government
except national fiscal crisis or international competition (which is
why we’ve seen neoliberal reform movements in Canada, Sweden, New
Zealand and India in the wake of such forces).

You should listen to the link to the story of airline “deregulation”
I linked to. They’re a PERFECT example of my point. The
deregulations that Teddy Kennedy promoted and Jimmy Carter executed
improved access to air travel for everyone. But they were partial.
They opened competition that had be forbidden by government
regulation and allowed prices to be more responsive to reality,
allowing business models and fares to adapt. Enter Southwest, Jet
Blue, Frontier, etc.

But much of air travel is still monopolized by the state and still
SUCKS. Airport security via TSA is a pointless, parasitic and
abusive theater. It might as well be an explicit program of training
the public to become lambs to the slaughter (and maybe it is). But
also… airports are all government owned monopolies and air traffic
control is an antiquated and inefficient monopoly. Much of the rest
of the world has privatized both to a large measure with, from what
I understand, no negative impact on safety. Surely we can move very
dramatically towards a much larger role of private business and have
a better overall air travel system than we do today. You know… like
Scandinavia. (http://bit.ly/2CSV3lL). I don’t know enough about
passenger rail or its inherent technological challenges around
safety relative to air travel to consider it a comparison. But isn’t
most passenger rail government built and run? Amtrak sure is.
Personally, I think passenger rail is a 20th century tech whose time
has passed. Driverless cars will make these already unsustainable
rail boondoggles fully useless.

As to your last point about “business inventing government”… I
agree! That’s my whole point. Government by its nature is as a
political monopoly is prone to regulatory capture and corruption.
This history goes all the way back to the interstate commerce act of
the 1880s that began the administrative state. But seeking to
control government and tilt it’s rules to your favor is not a
function of business as an enterprise. Every interest group attempts
and achieves this kind of capture at some level. What we should work
to do is build a wall between the power of the state and narrow
interests looking to have it set the rules in their favor. The
constitution attempted this with the bill of rights, banning
congress from passing laws across a large swath of life. Those bans
have been steadily eroded to the point where the government can pass
a law banning you from growing a plant on your own property and
smoking it in your home by yourself. 

Government scale and scope has grown over the same time period of
people’s concern over inequality in the US. While I’m unconcerned
about inequality for its own sake (Steve Jobs and Bill Gates got
rich making society richer), I’m deeply concerned with the
systematic privilege our current state bestows on the politically
connected. It was through this lens that a left-of-center government
in New Zealand adopted market-based reforms and I think it’s the
ethos for a liberal-libertarian reform movement if one could ever
re-emerge akin to the Clintonian “New Democrats”. 

Like you, I have no idea how to constrain these forces of leviathan.
The futurist in my tends to think that our current mega-states will
ultimately break apart. So perhaps competition between states will
be the force that constrains government power more effectively in
the future. For now, I do what I can as an individual by engaging in
conversations like this and creating content through our company to
spark this sort of thinking.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #38 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 18 09:30

    
In worker co-operatives  you don't have the problems of inequality
that you see in typical hierarchical business environments. In a
democratic workplace, where everyone doing work has a share, you
don't have a privileged class of execs, everybody's in the same
soup, and can always see what's cooking at all levels. 

A few years ago I turned my tech company into a worker co-op owned
with other members, who had been contractors before the transition.
We're pretty small, so consensus is easy, and I've been thinking
about the inherent difficulty in scaling a democray.

Cooperatives are the opposite of "constant dedication to oppressing
their employees and taking advantage of their customers."

As for government ... if weak accountability is the problem, better
accoundability is the solution. 

The problem I see with John's argument is related to the problem I
see with the Trump Administration. Business people don't understand
government, they make assumptions looking at it from the outside.
Trump came in from the outside, from a lifelong business career, and
doesn't have a clue what government is about. He brought in
assumptions that are off base and likely destructive.

John is confusing government with politics - they're not the same
thing, from my perspective. I see government as shared management of
actions and resources, and I think the solution is not to lean more
on business (thought that's certainly a Good Thing where business
can be more effective). Rather, make government more transparent and
cooperative, and end the left vs right wars that infect discourse
and public action.

Lenny Bruce, at the Berkeley Concert:

"‘So we’ll have to have some rules, that’s how the law starts, out
of the facts, let’s see. I’ll tell you what we’ll do, we’ll have a
vote: we’ll sleep in Area A, is that cool? OK good. We’ll eat in
Area B, good? Good. We’ll throw our crap in Area C.’ So everything
went along pretty cool, everyone is very happy. One night everybody
is sleeping, a guy woke up pow got a face full of crap, and said,
‘Hey what’s the deal here, I thought we had a rule? Eat. Sleep. And
crap. And uh, I was sleeping and I got a face full of crap.’ So they
said, well, ah, the rule is substantive. That’s, see, that’s what
the 14th Amendment is, it regulates the rights, but it doesn’t do
anything about it, it just says that’s where it’s at. We’ll have to
do something to enforce the provisions, to give it some teeth.
Here’s the deal, if anybody throws any crap on us, while we’re
sleeping, they get thrown in the craphouse. Agreed? Guy goes, ‘Well,
everybody?’ Yeah. ‘But what about if it’s my mother?’ You don’t
understand, your mother will be the fact, it has nothing to do with
it, it’s just a rule. eat, sleep, and crap, anybody throws any crap
on us they get thrown right in the crap house. Your mother doesn’t
enter into it, everybody’s mother gets thrown in the craphouse.
Priest, Rabbi’s, they all go. Agreed? OK, agreed. OK, now going
along very cool, guy sleeping, pow he got a face full of crap. Now
he wakes up he sees he’s all alone this guy, and he looks and
everyone is having a big party. He says ‘Hey! What’s the deal I
thought we had a rule? Eat, sleep and crap, and you just threw a
face full of crap on me.’ He says ‘Oh it’s a religious holiday! And,
uh, we told you many times that you were going to live your indecent
life and sleep all day you deserve to be thrown crap on you while
you’re sleeping, and the guy said ‘bull shit’. A rule’s a rule and
this guy started to separate the Church and the State right down the
middle pow. Here’s the Church rule and here’s the federalist rule.
OK, everything going along very cool, and guy said, ‘Wait a minute,
although we made the rule and…how we gonna get somebody to throw
somebody in the craphouse? We need somebody to enforce it. Law
Enforcement.’ OK, now they put the sign up on the wall WANTED LAW
ENFORCEMENT, and guys apply for the job. ‘Look, here’s our problem,
see we’re trying to get some sleep and people keep throwing crap on
us. Now we want someone to throw them right in the craphouse, and
I’m delegated to doing the hiring here, and, so, here’s what the job
is…They won’t go in the craphouse by themselves, and we all agreed
on the rule now, and we firmed it up, so there’s nobody get’s out of
it, everybody’s vulnerable they get thrown right in the craphouse,
but you see, I can’t do it cause I do business with these assholes
and it looks bad for me, you know…So I want somebody to do it for
me, ya know, so I tell you what, here’s a stick and a gun and you do
it. But wait til I’m out of the room, and whenever it happens see
I’ll wait back here and watch you know, and you make sure you kick
em in the ass and throw them in there. Now, you’ll hear me say a lot
of times that it takes a certain kind of mentality to do that work
you know and all that bullshit, but you understand that’s all
horseshit, just kick em in the ass and make sure that it’s done. So
it happens that…

"Now comes the riot, or the marches, and everybody’s wailing and
blopblopblopblop. And you got a cop there who’s standing with a
shortsleeve shirt on and a stick in his hand, and the people are
yelling Gestapo! at him! Gestapo? You asshole, I’m the mailman!
Gestapo!?"
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #39 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:01

    
Y’know, the “atemporality” thing was a fun insight to play with, and
I enjoyed it and it may have been helpful, but I think it’s dated as
a sensibility.  A network society doesn’t treat time in the same way
that a more analog, more linear society does,  However, time passes
anyway.  Social change still occurs no matter how people think or
talk about it.

So I figured that “atemporality” would have a sell-by date, and that
was probably two years ago.  There was a media tipping point, where
the “atemporal” structure, which is about creating meaning with
Internet search engines, turned into the present situation, of
meaning created through social media on smart-phones.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #40 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:03

    

The death of net neutrality is a formal marker for a Post-Internet
world.  The guys who voted for “Restore Internet Freedom” think it
means “freedom” for Google Apple Facebook Amazon Microsoft’s form of
capitalism.  They’re okay with that “restoration.”  They were never
“internet users” anyway, that was for some
coder/science/cyberculture big brain avant-garde that they never
much liked anyway.  

So they figure it’s time for the R&D crowd to clear the hell out of
the way, and give up control of the radical unstable Internet to
lobby guys with suits and ties, who have proper offices on K Street.
From their point of view, that’s historic inevitability.  It’s a
“restoration of freedom” to be like Detroit once was, American and
Great.  

But it also means that the “atemporal” sensibility, of using the
Internet to find and loosely joining pieces of history, is no longer
in cultural vogue.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #41 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:04

    

“Social media” is not much like the Internet; it’s social, about
filter bubbles, national firewalls and weaponized lies to defend the
interests of in-groups.  “Atemporal” doesn’t really work in that
condition.   

Especially, the nation-state badly needs a heritage narrative.  If
you don’t have one that compels respect, then you’re not a
nation-state, and you get turned into a money laundry.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #42 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:04

    
n 2017 a lot of heritage narrative started to appear within the
post-Brexit Europe.  Pro-EU guys, who used to be very colorless,
technocratic, as invisible and as function-centric as possible,
started raising their heads over the parapet and talking about World
War II. About historic missions, ever-greater union, mistakes that
would be regretted for a generation — a very temporal, linear
narrative, asserting that the EU is an advance, that it must move
forward, that heretics and dropouts from Europe would be abandoned,
like deadbeats kicked off a moving train.  

So the EU, which was about market regulations, turned into European
history again.  Some tautly argued history, too: this happens, that
happens, this happens because of that.  “Atemporality” is a lot more
loose, emergent, and multi-causal than that.  Atemporality is like
an open-source, flat-world,  marketplace of meaning where people
place meme-bids.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #43 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:05

    

Social media filter-bubbles are also like network-society, they’re a
daughter of it,  but they’re a lot more anxious about nationalism
and identity politics.    The new Pepe-the-Frog cults don’t want
bureaucracy, because they don’t know how to manage it, but they want
power and they want credibility.

Russian filter-bubble guys used to talk about being Russian, as
somehow opposed to being Ukrainian.  Now that the Ukrainian civil
war is grinding on endlessly and part of the background noise, the
Russian meme-warriors talk about standard national-social stuff such
as “demographic winter,” protecting reproductive families from gays
and feminists, reviving ancient tumble-down Orthodox Church sites,
and similar pseudo-conservative stunts that can site their weird
online cluster of blinky little phones in some grave, somber
time-line of many Slavic centuries, past and future.  That’s not
“atemporality, but it’s not really “history” either, because these
guys just lie all the time.  They lie fantastically, ceaselessly,
they contradict themselves in a breath.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #44 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 18 10:05

    

To be “atemporal,” you’ve got to be able to mix and match memes
rather freely, but in the forthcoming situation of “sovereign
cyberspaces” and cyberwar trolling gangs, there’s a lot of silos
that you just can’t get to any more.  It’s become a different
cultural sensibility now.  

That’s why people like the Estonians, who really metabolized the
e-culture of the past two decades and want to take that forward,
look like they’re from another planet nowadays.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #45 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 4 Jan 18 14:57

    
Thank John for <37>, Jon.  Gotta make dinner at the moment, but will
definitely read it in detail, although so as not to derail this
discussion, I may forward any further thoughts to you.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #46 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 18 15:24

    
Atemporality shivers at the sight of Big Mind. If you spend some
time in the present, really in the present, time and space fall away
- or time is revealed for what it is, a relative metric, useful for
keeping track and keeping score. A manifestation of movement. 

Brad Warner, quoting Eihei Dogen:

"You and I are time.... We are not beings who exist in time, who
have a beginning and ending on some great cosmic chessboard called
'time.' Rather we are time itself. We our very selves are
manifestations of time and, as such, we are all of time. To be is to
be time." 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #47 of 221: Patrick Lichty (jonl) Fri 5 Jan 18 04:30

    
Via email from digital artist and art professor Patrick Lichty, our
Dubai correspondent:

Jon, as he does, asked me to chime in as I’ve been out of the States
for a bit. Basically why I haven’t been harassing Bruce over morning
coffee at Jon’s house during South by Southwest for the last 2-3
years. 

Why? Because I’m basically in Dubai, and hanging out with the
Futuries.  This happy Ridley Scott scenario really looks like Blade
Runner at night when you look down the Sheikh Zayed from a Metro
bridge (yes, the bullet-shaped thing that was in Jamestown Station
in Star Trek: Beyond…)  In all reality, I’ve lived in Sharjah (the
center of Culture), Dubai (The center of Business/Tourism), and now
Abu Dhabi (the center of Government) over the past three years,
teaching VR/AR to Emirati girls at the national university, mostly. 
I’ve been to the Dubai Future Foundation and Hyperloop Engineering
Group house parties, and one of the CEO’s is a mean DJ. I’m also
working on a Cli-Fi anthology with a buddy of mine in Anchorage as a
response to failed 70’s domed city proposals for Denali and Bruce’s
call for 22nd Century fiction a while ago. ETA is 2019.  We all have
our anvils.

Living in the Emirates is like living in a perpetual alpha revision
where science fiction has collapsed into near future speculation
where Galt’s Gulch meets sunny positivism, and generally speaking,
nothing’s a problem here until it’s a problem.  Really. Like the
North Korean Restaurant. More on that later.

 

I’ll frame things in a weird way in that I just got back from
spending winter break, not in the States or anywhere sane, but in
Kazakhstan with avant-garde political artists talking about tactical
media and the “Modernization of Consciousness” that is being
promoted by the Nazarbayev government. Most importantly, Astana is
the site of the current world expo, the Future of Energy… In a way,
Astana is the Dubai of the Steppe, with some of the world’s largest
resources of oil and gas in the west of K, where some of the lower
concentrations of population, where the Steppe resembles Texas in a
lot of ways.  And grand architecture is a big part of this, as the
dome of the central pavilion, topping out at 8 billion dollars (Dr.
Evil pinky pointed properly in mouth) has been a sensitive subject
as being called the Death Star of the Steppe. Furthermore, the
remoteness of KZ means that they threw a party and not that many
came.  Not to say it isn’t interesting, though.

 

But then, I’m now convinced that the Expo is a global photo opp, and
in that Dubai is 2020, it only makes sense. Dubai is the Future,
son, and that’s where we’re going.  At a dinner I was at last year
at the World Government Summit, I remember a CEO of one of the
groups here say, “You know, here in Dubai, we love the future, and
we’re going to do it. And like we have to go to Congress, do we?” 
Get Musk on the phone, Sheikh Mohammed wants to talk.

 

In many ways, I feel like Dubai is the New American Wild West, and
why not? You have opportunity, money, and lots of sand, and a bunch
of guys (mostly, but keep in mind most of the Emirati government is
female) who see Dubai (and the Emirates, for that matter) as the
hope for a progressive Arabia. And, by the way, our cops drive
McLarens. (I have pics of one that stopped at my weightlifting
parlour.)  Its success is also part of the reason big brother Saudi
Arabia is liberalizing its society (women driving, movie theatres,
more on the way – you might even be able to visit soon).

Everything Bruce has said is pretty spot on in Dubai, and again, he
is right when you listen to Emirati culture being an MBA-driven,
Positive, Seven Habits, humming hive of figures, money and
accountability.  Dead center of this is HH Sheikh Mohammed bin
Rashid al Makhtoum, poetry writing, horse racing, CEO of Dubai who
periodically has open majlises and a hotline for suggestions.  He
stated last year that VR would be a huge part of the Dubai economy,
and the Hope Mars probe is getting ready to go by 2020 from the
Mohammed Bin Rashid Space Centre.  I’ll be honest in that some of
the futurist PR might be a little in beta, but the drone taxi was
sure as heck at the GITEX tech show this year, and it looked pretty
operational.

I’ll not cover some of the stuff Bruce was hinting at to make a
point.

I’m hoping to stay here for the next 4 years at least, and I also
hope to be hanging out between Astana and Dubai a lot between then
and now (with trips to do performance art at 15th century Tash Rabat
in Kyrgizia)… The point is that Dubai is the 2020 World Expo, or
which I’m already working on a couple projects/pavilions for.  The
epicenter of this is in the South, Jebal Ali, where they are
building a megacomplex and 1500 new hotels for the expo.  Yes,
that’s right – fifteen hundred.  The idea is to use the expo as an
accelerator to drive Dubai’s economy eternally beyond the oil
barriers into tourism, real estate, commerce. The other important
thing is that it is also close to large complexes like the Dubai
Amusement Parks, featuring the world’s first Bollywood-based
amusement park.

 

Oh, right. Remember that big building on the coast? That Burj
Khalifa thing? Forget it. Calatrava’s building something bigger on
the Creek. Really. 2020.

And in Jebel Ali on the E11 there is a great food truck park called
The Last Exit, and the southbound one is Mad Max themed (with really
cool post apocalyptic trucks) with graffiti saying, “Make Jebel Ali
Great Again”. (yes, really)

I realize this sounds like a semi-promotional salad, but that’s the
culture here. There are issues, and we could talk about them, but as
Bruce said, generally the human factors offered are better than they
were before, women are outpacing men in universities and government
positions, and so on.

If anyone is interested, I’ll talk about the Emirates as Land of the
Mall of Arabia (Minnesota pun intended). And. The Louvre and the
Salvador Mundi. (Abu Dhabi, but hey)

What I’m curious about is 2070, and how Dubai and Astana will fare. 
I imagine if there isn’t a huge fallout between Saudi and Iran, I
think Dubai will fare better than Astana overall because of its
progressive approach, concerns about the populace that KZ is behind
them on, and sheer scale. 

That’s about enough for now, and I look forward to continuing my
report from the City of the Future.  It’s amazing, strange, and an
amazing experiment to be part of.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #48 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 5 Jan 18 10:01

    
Machines don't "think," at least not the way humans do. Brains
secrete thoughts through an organic process, impacted by bundles of
emotions and intentions, and more or less logical framing. Computers
don't do that, but can clearly be programmed to mimic human
cognition. We're getting better at doing that - creating artificial
or simulated intelligence.  AI is quite the buzzword lately, but
it's more Siri than Skynet. 

I just asked Siri to define AI. She says it's "the theory and
development of computer systems able to perform tasks that normally
require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech
recognition, decision-making, and translation between languages."

Especially when the simulation is powerful and convincing, it's
tempting to anthropomorphize AI, especially after so many years of
sci-fi speculation about robots and other sentient machines. But
it's important to understand that AI is not like human intelligence.

So why are smart people like Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking anxious
about an AI apocalypse?  They seem to believe that a
superintelligent AI could operate by its own volition, with goals
that conflict with human goals. But my concern would be in
offloading decisions to machine intelligence lacking the nuance of
human intelligence - the potential for bad, potentially destructive
decisions.

I find it interesting that Deep Mind, the AI company that Google
acquired, has formed an ethics unit, DeepMind Ethics & Society. "Its
aim, according to DeepMind, is twofold: to help technologists
understand the ethical implications of their work and help society
decide how AI can be beneficial." ~
http://www.wired.co.uk/article/deepmind-ethics-and-society-artificial-intellig
ence

That gets to a different point that's not just about AI, but about
technology in general. We need methods and mechanisms for assessing
the ethics and potential consequences of any emerging technologies,
not just AI.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #49 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 5 Jan 18 10:55

    
Patrick's mention, <inkwell.vue.503.48> of the Kazakhstan
"modernization of consciousness" caught my eye. Here's what
Nazarbayev had to say:
http://www.inform.kz/en/president-nursultan-nazarbayev-s-article-the-course-to
wards-future-modernization-of-public-conscience_a3016600

He's talking about about opening to the world and to technology
while sustaining national identity.

Last February I met with a delegation from Kazakhstan. They wanted
to talk about "the continual morphing of social media and how fake
news and alternative facts have plunged the internet into chaos for
government and citizens alike" (quoting from the meeting request).
We had a long discussion about propaganda and the weaponization of
social media. Smart group; I'm wondering how they relate to
Nazarbayev's concept of modernization.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #50 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 18 12:41

    
“You and I are time.... We are not beings who exist in time.”


I’m friendly toward this position, because I think it may be key to
a problem in futurist ethics.

If you’re a futurist, you become aware that ethics change. 
Judgements of right and wrong are historically ductile.  People do
sense that, but they don’t know how to deal with it.  It seems
sinful.

By historical standards, we’re morally horrifying here in our shiny
new 2018. The oligarchs at the top of our society are incredibly
greedy, grasping and unfair.  The rest of us are unashamed sodomites
with fantastic amounts of legalized marijuana.  

Our behavior is damnable on its face by the moral standards of one
century ago, or two, three, four, five centuries.  To find a sister
society to our own — meaning people would consider us in 2018 to be
normal, A-okay and entirely sensible — you’d likely have to go back
to the Rome described in the “Satyricon” of Petronius Arbiter.  The
heroes in that proto-novel would have no big problem with our
cheerful gay sex and the conspicuous wealth of our vulgar oligarchs.

But we Americans wouldn’t own up to our own moral decadence.  No
way.  We’re super-scoldy and scarily confident about our superior
ethics.  We’re bold and praiseworthy ethical pioneers, or else,
we’re the heroic last-ditch defenders of Judaeo-Christian decency. 
We rival the Puritan iconoclasts for bitter harassment, for
ceaselessly condemning how our contemporaries behave.  

The bizarre, incoherent variety of our moral convictions, that
doesn’t bother us.  We’re getting more rigidly judgmental, across
the board. We’re never blandly tolerant of moral differences. We
really sweat it about making entirely sure that delusional
malefactors know all about our stern disapproval of their stern
disapprovals.  There’s nothing more modern, we do it every day, in
droves.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #51 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 18 12:41

    
How can you make a future-proofed ethical judgement?  Well, opinions
differ on that.  

We might say — it’s traditional — there’s a timeless divine ethics. 
The will of God was present at the Creation and will endure beyond
Armageddon.   We mortals must always fall short of timeless moral
perfection due to original sin, and also due to the worldly sinners
of the wicked society around us. But if we candidly open our heart
to God, we’ll be forgiven our failings.  Even if we are, say, the
pious Christian captain of an African slave ship.  If we confess our
unworthiness and the Creator forgives us, then we’ve done the best
we can.



Or else (we might say), although things may look pretty bad at any
particular moment, there is a higher ethics toward which mankind
itself progresses — the “arc toward justice.”  We’ll get there, if
we have faith in democracy.  So I may have done rather a lot of dire
harm, myself — maybe I was a well-meaning social worker who sent
gays to get shock treatment. But I did my duty in pursuit of a
higher social good.  These regrettable excesses are historical
accidents.  I voted properly. I meant well.  

I’m making fun here, but Vaclav Havel, who I respect a lot, had a
timeless ethics.  Havel writes about the crappy buildings made by a
tyrannical society, which often fall down and kill some random,
innocent young woman.  Havel describes how bogus it is to make
facile, hasty excuses for that endemic, inhumane shabbiness, which
deprives real people of a lifetime.  Havel demands of his readers
that they should face truth. Do they make complex, mealy-mouthed
excuses to continue their daily lives in miserable fear?  Or can
they stop being cowards, and rise up to become free, because they
abandon the deceit and the delusion? 

A great moral teacher, Vaclav Havel.  But he thought right and wrong
were eternal values.  I don’t believe that.  I don’t think the
evidence supports it.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #52 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 18 12:42

    

Another ethical position is one of cynical moral relativism.  “LOL
Nothing Matters.” I have issues with this one myself, because it’s
the closest one to my heart.  I understand that it tempts me to
justify myself, and not in a good way.

I’m not Vaclav Havel from Prague, but I am from Texas. Let’s suppose
I say that there is no moral difference between the people in
contemporary Galveston, Texas (a city  I know well) and the
Karankawa Native Americans of the 1700s, who also lived in Galveston
Island. 

The Karankawa tribal people enjoyed the many beauties of their
native Galveston Island. They also liked to tie up passing
strangers, slice pieces off them, roast the human meat on sticks,
and eat their cooked flesh in front of the still-living victims.  

I think my fellow Texans would do well by knowing about our
predecessors the Karankawas.  I’m Texan, too, but I’m not entirely
prepared to blandly excuse the Karankawas.  I rather think that
sadistic cannibalism of living victims was pretty bad behavior. 
Worse, that ritual of theirs was was meant to look and feel bad. 
That ritual was a form of intimidation and terror, practiced with a
cruel intent, a malignant purpose.

But I can also say that, if I’d been a Karankawa in Texas in the
1700s, I likely would have gone along with the mainstream.  I would
have failed at the wild moral visionary leap needed to think that it
was somehow wrong and bad to eat weird strangers.   

I think I might have noticed the issue. Because it’s a rather
typical Well State of the World issue, the kind of abstract,
our-there thing that we discuss ourselves.  I likely might have
offered some modest technical advice about not slicing through a
victim’s artery, since  eating people alive isn’t merely about
crudely devouring them.  No, it isn’t.  It’s behavior that makes a
higher point. It’s a public performance and a form of political
theater.  Technically, we would want to pull up our socks about the
designer details of our grisly cannibal rituals. If you’re gonna do
it, do it right.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #53 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 18 12:42

    

I do give myself that much credit as a Karankawa moral philosopher,
but I’m not sure it’s fair to ask for any more insight from any
Karankawa.  Or from ourselves, either.   

I would properly expect condemnation and punishment if I ate some
victim tomorrow.  Because that would be pretty bad. I also think
that the Karankawas sensed that they were being wicked.  They did 
horrible things for political effect, to impress, intimidate and
repel dangerous foreigners.  They expected the same treatment from
their own enemies.  Those were cruel times.  The Karankawas didn’t
survive those times.  Too bad for them, our predecessors. 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #54 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 18 12:42

    

It’s easy to use the Karankawa people as a rhetorical punching-bag,
because they lack any Internet access.  They can’t form a social
media group on 4Chan and flame back at us.

So let’s suppose that a Karankawa woman invents a time machine and
appears in our present day, freshly blood-smeared from her grisly
cannibal feasts.  She can talk, she wants to justify herself.  Is
she a bad person?

In this ethical thought experiment, are we supposed to arrest her? 
Has she even broken any law of ours?  What did she do that is so
wrong?  

If this happened more than once, I think we’d invent some robust set
of trans-temporal extenuating circumstances. We would probably tell
her to knock it off with her cannibalism, but we wouldn’t absolutely
condemn her as some utter ghoul and horrid gremlin, forever beyond
our pale.  We’d invent some kind of historical “truth and
reconciliation” system for her, and her family, and her people.  

“Oh.  Did you eat those shipmates of Cabeza de Vaca?  Look, we get
it about you eating conquistadors — we’re not too cool about
Columbus, ourselves, not any more.  Here’s a halfway house where we
can manage the catering for you.  Let’s meet halfway.”

If such an ethics makes any sense, then maybe would invent such an
ethics right now. Not “cosmopolitan,” but cosmo-temporal.   If we
had such a method of ethics, it would likely improve our  harsh,
too-certain treatment of our own contemporaries.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #55 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 6 Jan 18 05:18

    
Although it makes for some uncomfortable conclusions, I think you do
have to judge people in the context of their time, culture, and
society.

An uncomfortable example: in Nazi Germany, we have to distinguish
between people who persecuted Jews because they were driven by evil
and those who persecuted Jews because everyone was doing it and
society at large sanctioned it.

Humans are social animals, full stop.

If, as seems likely, our civilization experiences a collapse due to
climate change, people in the future will certainly regard most of
us as evil.  But I drive a CO2-spewing car to work because everyone
is doing it and because there's no other practical way to get to my
office.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #56 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 18 06:55

    
Also, you drive a CO-spewing car because you don't have clear
alternatives. That will change. Even if the USA has renewed its
commitment to the burn, globally the handwriting is on the wall. And
I expect that one positive effect of US intransigence re climate
change is that the rest of the world will double down on its
commitment to reduce emissions, in large part by moving to cleaner
forms of energy. If, globally, there's a move away from the burn,
the USA will eventually follow.

Consider this:
https://www.curbed.com/2017/2/6/13428414/car-buying-electric-vehicles-uber-lyf
t
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #57 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 6 Jan 18 07:06

    
I almost went for an electric car last time, but I don't have
anywhere to plug it in (no garage).
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #58 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 18 08:44

    
Soon enough you'll sell your car hop on a low-cost autonomous
vehicle for your commute. Uber says so. Get ready.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #59 of 221: Alberto Cottica (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 18 08:45

    
Via email from Alberto Cottica Re: bruces Karankawa parable,
especially #55

What is moral judgment for?

If it is an evolutionary device to improve in-group collaboration by
spotting and neutralising free riders, then Mark is exactly right in
#55. By doing what they did, 18th century Karankawas and Nazi
Germans were being team players, as per the roles defined by their
particular teams. 

There is some support for this view among evolutionary biologists,
especially the cultural evolution (Henrich, E.O. Wilson etc.). But I
am not sure this is a comfortable position in the light of Bruce's
stated uneasiness with cynical moral relativism in #52. For what
it's worth, I totally get where he is coming from.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #60 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 18 09:59

    
I just completed a survey with questions about the impact of the
Internet and digital technology on well-being, and found myself
answering optimistically, despite the fog of fake news propaganda,
intrusions by malevolent hackers, ascendance of cyberwar, terrorist
recruitment via social media, etc.  I argue that we're in a
transition re technology, which is evolving faster than most puny
humans can comprehend. Some future-focused philosophers talk about
accelerating change and singularity, where computer intelligence
will surpass human intelligence, i.e. a case where we never, as a
species, catch up (which I already discussed a bit in
<inkwell.vue.503.48>). How this strikes you depends on your
definition of intelligence.

Back in the 90s I recall a discussion with my partner at the time,
Paco Xander Nathan, and our friend Donna Kidwell. We were talking
about wearable computers, and we were realizing that we were already
cyborgs - we were persistently enhanced by digital technology. The
term I started using back then was "cyborganic." We've had since
then a mainstreaming of cyborgization - practically everybody has a
pocket computer ("smartphone") with capabilities 'way beyond what we
had in 1993.  Most learn what they need to know to make use of the
equipment, but the real evolution comes when humans have deeper
comprehension of their digital extensions. 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #61 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 18 11:05

    
https://www.politico.eu/article/latvia-a-disappearing-nation-migration-populat
ion-decline/

Here's an article on Latvia, which is Estonia's sister Baltic nation
and on the southern Estonian border.  Latvia's not doing well. 
People just leave, mostly for other countries of the EU that aren't
as moribund.

Estonia's also losing population, but not at Latvia's ominous speed.
I wish I had a good map of the planet's depopulating areas. There
are more of those than people understand.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #62 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 18 11:15

    
I kinda doubt that a moral judgement has to be "for" anything.  This
is an instrumental argument.  Should we scrap morality if it doesn't
conform to a biologist's current ideas of evolutionary theory? 
That's putting ourselves in the Ebenezer Scrooge camp.  Scrooge was
a big fan of Malthus and in "A Christmas Carol" he's always going on
about "reducing the surplus population."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #63 of 221: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 6 Jan 18 12:16

    
Bruce, do you think SF authors have an outsized responsiblity to help
refine our public understanding of Artifical Intelligence?

Consider "Dude, you broke the future!"    By Charlie Stross:

<http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2018/01/dude-you-broke-the-
future.html>

Like Ted Chiang's buzzfeed article, I think Charlie Stoss' rant is
helping us push back against a fairly narrow concept of AI.

<https://www.buzzfeed.com/tedchiang/the-real-danger-to-civilization-isnt-ai-
its-runaway?utm_term=.efJw9ElRD#.milEJmexg>

But it seems to me that if we look carefully at the technical
underpinnings of what might constitute Artificial Intelligence, we might
well conclude that 'Old, Slow AI' actaully pre-dates the Law of
Corporations by quite a bit.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #64 of 221: Kieran O'Neill (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 18 15:29

    
Via email from Kieran O'Neill:

As a (kind of) response to Bruce's request for a depopulation map:

http://metrocosm.com/global-immigration-map/

(It only goes up to 2015, but it's a pretty useful interactive
visualisation.)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #65 of 221: John Spears (banjojohn) Sat 6 Jan 18 15:34

    
 
John Papola

<37>

You say "competitive business does the best job of providing a
SYSTEMATIC check on bad behavior". How? Can you provide real life
examples that we've witnessed in modern history? 

>Government scale and scope has grown over the same time period of
people’s concern over inequality in the US.

Whoa.

Well, while the military/prison budget has certainly grown in scale
and scope, public education and the social safety net have been
eviscerated. It's kind of a mixed bag, wouldn't you say?

anyway....

So the government's growth in scale and scope is responsible for
"people's concern" over inequality? How about the inequality,
itself? Is that the fault of "big gov'ment", too? I'm confused,
especially since you tell us in the next sentence that you're
"unconcerned about inequality for its own sake". If so, why did you
even mention it? I would observe that reduction in government lead
directly to the Great Recession of 2008. I'm also curious how you
could be unconcerned with the current state of wealth inequality,
something I consider obscene and dangerous to the fabric of society.

"Business good: government bad", just doesn't cut it as a basis for
any kind of argument. It's far too simplistic. 

Doesn't business, as currently organized, demand quarterly growth?
Isn't that synonymous with promoting consumption of global resources
for profit? How can that be good?

>Governments lie us into war.

Really. Cui bono? Who has the most motivation to promote perpetual
conflict? I would say arms merchants and war profiteers, which are
businesses, are they not, seeking blind growth, while forsaking all
other values? Yet you place all the blame on the politicians, as
opposed to those who buy the politicians. Something is missing. 

many posts slipped in  

  
 

 

 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #66 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 18 22:52

    
*He’s good with the sensibility of the global moment, Dan Hill,
although, being a design critic, he seems to be pretty unhappy with
pretty much all of it pretty much all the time.

*A downright lyrical paragraph in one of his recent essays here,
even though it's just a list.



https://medium.com/butwhatwasthequestion/the-battle-for-the-infrastructure-of-
everyday-life-6c9b0572e57f

Yet all of this, as powerful as it is, remains secondary to the
everyday experience of living in our cities. Art lags behind, unable
to capture the visceral quotidian experience of Uber, TaskRabbit,
Snapchat, Giphy, Pokémon Go (which has already Been and Pokémon
Gone), Helsinki’s autonomous shuttles and Singapore’s self-driving
taxis, Japanese sushi-delivery robots and Domino’s Pizza delivery
drones, American security-guard robots upended in shopping-mall
fountains, South Korean robotic mannequins, ‘conversations’ with AI
personal assistants over email, shouting at Amazon Alexa,
‘holographic’ assistants at airports, Microsoft chatbots becoming
racist and genocidal on Twitter, Chinese chatbots vanishing after
spurning the Communist Party, 4Chan, 3D printed handguns and Google
Tango phones 3D-mapping spaces, Russian election-hacking multiplied
by Cambridge Analytica and the Macedonian Fake-News Complex,
Icelandic crowdsourced constitutions, Dutch police training eagles
to take down illegal drones, Bitcoin hard forks, Ethereum hacks … In
other words, a quick flick across the home page of The
Verge or TechCrunch. Art in general has not found a foothold in
these new times.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #67 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 18 23:03

    

"As a (kind of) response to Bruce's request for a depopulation map:

http://metrocosm.com/global-immigration-map/

"(It only goes up to 2015, but it's a pretty useful interactive
visualisation.)"

*That is indeed a remarkably interesting and pretty set of data
visualizations, but what I'm looking for is a map of areas that have
lost population -- where people used to live, but now there are much
fewer left.  Puerto Rico's a new one, but war and disaster is just
one cause of this relative abandonment of certain regions. 
Sometimes it's seen as "regional economic decline," but if a whole
bunch of people just leave, of course you're gonna see "economic
decline" -- there's nothing left to be economic about.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #68 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 18 23:15

    
Life expectancy has declined in the US for the past two years. 
There were improvements in heart disease and cancer, but "accidental
death" (read mostly narcotics) and suicide have more than made up
for it.  It'll be interesting to see if the American death rate
increases this year as well.  

It's like the decline in American life expectancy in the early 1990s
-- Americans just weren't all that practically upset about a cohort
of fags and junkies dropping dead from AIDS, and the people dropping
dead now from oxycontin and raw despair seem to be catching a
similar Yankee social Darwinism.  Health care may be plenty
expensive in the USA, but life is cheap; a week doesn't go by
without a gun massacre, but they're part of the American background
noise now, like traffic injuries.

https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/fueled-by-drug-crisis-u
s-life-expectancy-declines-for-a-second-straight-year/2017/12/20/2e3f8dea-e596
-11e7-ab50-621fe0588340_story.html
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #69 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 7 Jan 18 03:52

    
Trying to synthesize e-Stonian residency, Asgard and
atemporality...it occurs to me that, not only are there no maps for
these territories, there are no allegiances to the Flatland world we
have left, as we venture forth into new territories...

It just does not matter any more if you are a citizen of Estonia,
USA, Denmark, Outer Mongolia....because that is not where you live
anymore, anyway.

Millenials and Z'ers live in their screens...3 for the Millenials, 5
for the Z'ers according to current cultural anthropologists.

Us old dogs, pop in and out. I try and limit my online time to no
more than an hour a day. But that's just me...I rarely turn my phone
on, except to make a call. And have, happily, gotten into the habit
of forgetting to take it with me at all. And I do not feel
"untethered". 

And "tethered" is a good world for our modern angst.  We are
digitally tethered in so many ways, as to give the false impression
that everything is just fine. "I'm connected, and that is all that
matters". 

To WHAT!!! My feet are still on the ground, there is still the
problem of no air, food or water in a collapsing environmental
ecology, where all this tethering is taking place. 

In the '80's we had tree-huggers. In the '20's we may well see cell
phone tower huggers.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #70 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 7 Jan 18 06:49

    
> Yankee social Darwinism

Yup. In the US, people who are dropping dead in large numbers are
assumed to be life's losers and not worth worrying about.  There's
been much coverage of the opiate crisis in the news, and some of it
has done an excellent job of contextualizing the distress in
historical and economic terms.  But I think for a lot of people,
it's still stuff happening in places they've never been to people
they don't know who are probably stupid (and thus deserve it).
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #71 of 221: Harry Henderson (hrh) Sun 7 Jan 18 09:02

    
It's interesting to read that well-articulated defense of
libertarianism/classical liberalism. That's pretty much where I was
30 years ago.

I think the problem with it is that it does not account for the
disruptive power of technology (particularly machine learning and
robotics) that is doing the following 1) rapidly reducing the need
for and value of human labor in many fields, and giving workers less
and less bargaining power in the labor market 2) optimizing
(maximizing) profit, particularly short term profit 3) commodifying
the individual's attention and emotions/neurological responses 4)
rapidly developing algorithms that are modifying our behavior,
usually without our knowledge and 5) doing all this without any
effective accountability.

A government bureaucracy can limit our choices and impose its will
through the crude mechanism of law. But I submit that our daily
lives are now influenced far more by Facebook, Amazon, Google, etc.
than by the FAA or the IRS. 

And then there is the corporation itself, which is essentially a new
kind of life form (first developed around 1600). Stross calls it a
(non digital) form of Artificial Intelligence. It optimizes for its
continued growth, and any benefits humans receive are only insofar
as they further that.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #72 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 7 Jan 18 10:09

    
That social darwinism reference surfaces the overriding problem, and
it's a problem of the heart. It's a bodhisattva challenge for those
who have that perspective, the health of all society is as important
as the health of any individual; we can cooperate in sharing
resources vs hoarding and exploitation by some at the expense of
others. Papola's libertarians would argue that cooperation and
sharing can't and shouldn't be coerced by legislation and
enforcement, then you have the problem of the wolves raiding the
sheep unguarded, until there's no sheep left, only hungry wolves.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #73 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 7 Jan 18 10:14

    
The topic arose, but we haven’t said much about “deep learning” as
yet.  I’m not an “AI” enthusiast.  I don’t think that deep learners
are much at all like “intelligence.”  I think our debate there has
severe problems, and most things said about it to date are
near-irrelevant.  Science fiction may have been in love with this
topic since the 1950s, but I’m not sure that we have much to offer
right now.

But here’s a chess game featuring Google’s “AlphaZero,” a deep
learner that taught itself the game of chess in only four days. 
AlphaZero has no database, no records at all of any human game of
chess.  Then AlphaZero takes on “Stockfish,” the strongest computer
player in the world — much stronger than any human player, of
course.

I’m no chess analyst.  The way the chess experts on Youtube analyze
the play of AlphaZero, I’m unhappy with that.  These human analysts
imagine that AlphaZero is thinking through the consequences of the
moves much like they do, but AlphaGo seems to me to be doing
something other than calculating positions.  It’s weighing the whole
chessboard with its networks of fake neurons, like dropping steel
weights onto a sheet of rubber.  AlphaZero plays positionally, it
cares nothing for the power of the pieces: if this, then that. 
AlphaZero oozes into a winning position, like the turret eyes of a
chameleon focussing on a fly.  

I saw all the ten AlphaZero games against the hapless Stockfish —
(okay, Stockfish is just a computer, so it didn’t suffer the burning
humiliation of a defeated champion, and thank goodness, because
Stockfish was crushed).  But AlphaZero, quite mindlessly, stifles
Stockfish in this game, which is the best that I saw among the ten. 


The attack of AlphaZero is suffocating. It removes the functional
capacity of the opponent’s pieces.  It’s “zugzwang.”  Stockfish
still has ten chess pieces left out of sixteen, but none of them can
do anything on the chessboard that’s worth doing.

Okay, it’s easy to get overawed by this demonstration of tremendous
deep-learning potency (especially if you’re a crap chess player like
me, because I’d never win a game against either of these machines in
ten lifetimes).  I also think it’s proper to describe deep learning
as “brittle” and “narrow,”  it’s not some panacea for every
challenging problem.  

But that is a machine that learned chess in just four days.  It
plays in blithe ignorance of centuries of human effort, and wins.
That is uncanny.  I’m an AI skeptic, and I felt a genuine chill,
looking at that.

https://youtu.be/lFXJWPhDsSY
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #74 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 7 Jan 18 11:06

    
Googling "deep learning illegal in EU" will turn up some interesting
articles on the subject.  The gist is that deep learning algorithms
can't explain their decisions, nor can humans figure out how those
decisions were arrived at, so using them for things with legal
and/or financial consequences may well be ruled illegal.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #75 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 7 Jan 18 12:52

    
That is interesting. How do we gauge the results of what we cannot
understand or follow?--this is an enormous thicket for those who
care about the repercussions of laws and their effects on humans, on
the biosphere. 

I recently had a conversation with a Harvard cryptographer about the
mostly-invisible biasses built into algorithms. Her current work is
on investigating the interaction of algorithm-made decisions and
social justice.

I've only just caught up on this conversation in one long read, and
will ask a question that goes back to earlier posts. I've read the
"Letter from Talinn" in a recent New Yorker, which raised my
interest in that very different ecology of the digital landscape.
The article had a fair bit of information about Estonia in general,
including what sounds a real parity for women in governance there.
In Bruce's description of Dubai, there was allusion to the one
Minister of Happiness and to some generally better situation for
women than in other Arab countries. But this leads me to wonder more
about the details. Perhaps women's progress and the actuality of
their lives is not so very visible for a man visiting Dubai, I
realize, but I'm curious what else you might be able to report here.


It does seem to me that the status and social compact surrounding
women's standing (legal, educational, and in the vast, less
formalized contexts) and how that may or may not be changing is one
of the rather large features of the world's human landscape these
days. It is also part and parcel with all other ways we have divided
ourselves up into Us/Them nexuses (nationalism, plutocrats, ethnic/
cultural/ religious identities, etc.) all of which are central
problems as they exist, and as they are being exploited, in the dire
state of the world in general.
  
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #76 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 7 Jan 18 14:22

    
Speaking of women's progress, Amber Tamblyn has an op-ed in the New
York Times about how women will presence themselves at today's
Golden Globes red carpet:

"... hundreds of women from the Time’s Up movement will reject
colorful gowns for black ones on the Golden Globes’ red carpet and
at related events across the country. Wearing black is not all we
will be doing. We will be doing away with the old spoken codes in
favor of communicating boldly and directly: What we are wearing is
not a statement of fashion. It is a statement of action. It is a
direct message of resistance. Black because we are powerful when we
stand together with all women across industry lines. Black because
we’re starting over, resetting the standard. Black because we’re
done being silenced and we’re done with the silencers. Tonight is
not a mourning. Tonight is an awakening."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #77 of 221: behind on BADGES! (obizuth) Sun 7 Jan 18 14:32

    
i am irked by this entire mishegas. SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND ASSAULT ARE BAD. 
TURNING A BLIND EYE TO THEM IS BAD. but DAMMIT, award shows are in the 
business of ENTERTAINING ME PERSONALLY and if you all are wearing BLACK it 
is NOT FUN FOR ME WHAT ABOUT MY NEEDS DAMMIT. give me a moment of escape 
in this endlessly bleak time! ONE TINY JOT OF JOY! i will not think less 
of you if you wear pretty colors. with, you know, a PIN telling me the 
patriarchy sucks, which, hey, i agree, yay us. 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #78 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 7 Jan 18 14:38

    
Such is the state of the world!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #79 of 221: Carol Hewitt (hewie) Sun 7 Jan 18 20:57

    

so, maybe a futurist question - it's an oldie but a goodie:
are men necessary?

(I mean, i love 'em myself, but not as much as air and water)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #80 of 221: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 7 Jan 18 21:39

    
'kinfolks for nerds'

https://spectacle.com/

i find this wildly depressing.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #81 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 7 Jan 18 22:41

    
Bruce, at SXSW last year, you knocked out a bout 10 possible futures
that have not happened yet....would you have any more additions or
amendments to those futures?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #82 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 7 Jan 18 22:44

    
to jog your memory:

a universal academy, where people devote themselves to learning.
militarization: people serve and receive basic support, which
pleases the right wing.
refugee status, where authorities supply clothing, food, shelter
(“universal basic everything”).
a religious settlement, like living as monks or under sharia
expanded retirement.  “Everyone retires at 40… everyone learns to
mimic the elderly.”
extermination, either First Nations or WWII style.
“health care uber alles”, a combination of hospitals and spas,
focused on preserving and growing wellness.  Transhumanism and life
extension come in here.
intentional rural communes, protected from the rest of society.
urban bohemians.  Getting paid to keep cities weird.
“Enlightenment” in the Buddhist sense, where people seek religious
truth in “a permanent Burning Man”, “a state of general liberation
from desire.”
a combination of religion and army, “all jihad all the time”.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #83 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 01:27

    

*Here's the German foreign minister talking about how Europe can't
trust Brexitania or Trumpistan, so they've gotta figure out some way
to soft-power project themselves as the current Leaders of the Free
World.

*American and British diplomats used to talk like this, but now
they're either getting fired, resigning, or raving like lunatics in
rightist social media.

http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/sigmar-gabriel-we-are-seeing-what-
happens-when-the-u-s-pulls-back-a-1186181.html


DER SPIEGEL: This political toughness is something Germany still
hasn't learned.

Gabriel: In the past, we could rely on the French, the British and,
especially, the Americans, to assert our interests in the world. We
have always criticized the U.S. for being the global police, and it
was often appropriate to do so. But we are now seeing what happens
when the U.S. pulls back. There is no such thing as a vacuum in
international politics. If the U.S. leaves the room, other powers
immediately walk in. In Syria, it's Russia and Iran. In trade
policy, it's China. These examples show that, ultimately, we are no
longer achieving either -- neither the dissemination of our European
values nor the advancement of our interests.

DER SPIEGEL: Are you actually certain that the U.S. still feels
bound to NATO's collective defense principles as outlined in Article
5 of the alliance treaty?

Gabriel: We are pleased that Donald Trump and the U.S. have affirmed
Article 5, but we should not test that trust too much. At the same
time, Europe could not defend itself without the U.S., even if
European structures were strengthened.

DER SPIEGEL: How do you view Germany's role in the world today?

Gabriel: We are a place many dream about today in the way the U.S.
was a place all those looking for freedom, prosperity and democracy
dreamed about from the 18th to the 20th century....
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #84 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 01:35

    
*If you're into Universal Basic Income, here's a guy who used to be
Ray Kurzweil fan, and got over the Singularity gospel, and is now
way into the UBI gospel.  I don't believe what he says, but this fit
of his interests me a lot.  It's like looking outside the window at
the tech-development weather and seeing that the barometer froze.

*There must be some Trump Make-American-Singularitarian guys around,
but I haven't gone looking.  I'm not sure I've got enough spare time
to parse a set of notions that is that confused.

https://medium.com/@Mark4UBI/america-s-reality-check-709a52eab0f3
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #85 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 01:48

    
*Speaking of strange but inevitable-seeming mixes of ideology, I'm
wondering why there is still no "FemmeCoin" of feminist safe-space
crypto coinage that's just for women.  

*You can come up with a million just-so stories to explain why not,
but if it happened next week, everybody would just go, "Well, that
was only to be expected."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #86 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 02:04

    
*I'm glad to hear, by the way, of Patrick Lichty being kept busy in
Dubai.  Also Astana.

*I've been to Astana.  The new capital of Kazakhstan probably the
strangest city that I've ever seen.  I wouldn't rank it with Dubai
as an axis of future change, because they're an oasis way out in the
steppes instead of being an easy entrepôt for millions like Dubai
is.  

But there's something haunting about Astana.  It's not just some
neat-o planned capital like Brasilia, because it's out there in the
middle of a vast Eurasian steppe.  There's an epistemological
violence to it, like a Saint Petersburg, which also appeared through
one leader's act of will.

*I was kind of sorry to leave Astana, actually.  For some reason,
even though I wasn't doing all that much in my brief visit, I felt
like I had unfinished business there.  It was like some strange
Astana adventure story had started and it broke off on page two.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/albums/72157628317216837
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #87 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 04:11

    
*Here's the head of Google Cloud explaining that we can get rid of
all kinds of terrible baked-in security and energy problems if we
just run everything on Google Cloud.  They'll haul in some
newfangled AI, kinda crack the old security conundrums one by one,
stepwise, and we'll have a new computational ecosystem that's
progressive, cleaner, safer, more advanced and works great.

*He makes a pretty good case for himself, too, if you don't mind the
obvious, glaring problem that it's Google that runs everything.


https://cloud.withgoogle.com/build/infrastructure/then-now-google-history-urs-
hölzle/

Hölzle: You know, nobody can predict what's gonna happen really five
years from now. Like, we couldn't do it in 2007, so, you know, don't
think we can do it today, but a few things are clear. Machine
learning is really for the first time really working. It's been
around for 25 years, but now it's really working for many problems,
not all, and it's starting to be accessible, right? And I'm
confident that just two years from now it's gonna be much more
accessible than it is today, and two years afterwards, it's even
more accessible, so really it becomes something that everyday people
can use. Very few customers will actually administer applications,
even complicated applications, in a detailed way, the way you're
forced to today because many of these things will just be automated.
The Cloud cannot be only a good economic choice, right? It really
has to be a good operational choice, a good functionality choice. It
has to accelerate your innovation, right? And it has to be the
easiest way to do great security, great compliance, really great —
all of the things that you care about in IT. It is a huge distance
that you cover, but you don't cover it in a huge step. You're gonna
cover it in a sequence of steps, each of which is much less scary
and actually very doable. 

Through the combination of these things, I think there is really a
huge opportunity to improve security for almost every company. Like,
it's a huge problem today both economic and actually technical, and
we're not in a good state almost anywhere, and now all the things
are coming together, and I think it is in our grasp collectively as
an industry to really make a huge step as a sequence of smalls steps
but get to a point where the transition in IT both in terms of what
can you do, how easy is it to do it, how cheaply is it to run it.
has sort of a similar step as it had for consumers to an Android or
an iPhone. This is a really huge step that is possible.

For example, just by moving those workloads to Cloud, if 50 percent
of the world's IT goes to Cloud, we're gonna save countless
gigawatts of energy just because the efficiency of the Cloud....
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #88 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 18 07:10

    
> Machine learning is really for the first time really working.

For those who might want to see some successful use cases, I found
this:
https://www.aaai.org/ojs/index.php/aimagazine/article/view/1303/1204
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #89 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Mon 8 Jan 18 07:17

    
>but DAMMIT, award shows are in the business of ENTERTAINING ME
PERSONALLY and if you all are wearing BLACK it is NOT FUN FOR ME
WHAT ABOUT MY NEEDS DAMMIT. give me a moment of escape in this
endlessly bleak time! ONE TINY JOT OF JOY!

Heh! I suspect that is tongue in cheek, but it brings up an
interesting thought for me.  I found the show riveting, and the sea
of black unexpectedly and extraordinarily inspiring.  Then Oprah's
acceptance speech sealed it as the first important cultural moment
of the new year - at least of my new year.

Which brings me to the SOTW connection: we started here, oh so many
years ago with the Viridian Design Movement.  A new flavor of
"green" - drawing forward environmental change with honey not
vinegar, making saving the planet exciting and desirable through a
deft design-art-culture move/movement.

A few years later, we were talking about how, hey, that sure didn't
work. Design challenges need expiration dates, outlived its sell-by
date, etc, etc.

Well, Veridian Green may not have worked, but yesterday I witnessed
Time's Up Black.  Interesting.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #90 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 18 07:23

    
Maria Popova on "the epidemic of identity politics turning us on
each other and on ourselves":
https://www.brainpickings.org/2018/01/01/john-o-donohue-walking-on-the-pasture
s-of-wonder/

"Paradoxically, in our golden age of identity politics and
trigger-ready outrage, this repression of our inner wildness and
fracturing of our wholeness has taken on an inverted form, inclining
toward a parody of itself. Where Walt Whitman once invited us to
celebrate the glorious multitudes we each contain and to welcome the
wonder that comes from discovering one another’s multitudes afresh,
we now cling to our identity-fragments, using them as badges and
badgering artillery in confronting the templated identity-fragments
of others.... Because no composite of fragments can contain, much
less represent, all possible fragments, we end up drifting further
and further from one another’s wholeness, abrading all sense of
shared aspiration toward unbiased understanding."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #91 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 18 07:27

    
<inkwell.vue.503.89>: I would argue that Viridian Green did work,
spectacularly, in surfacing the issue of global warming especially
within futurist and design communities, and that it had an effect of
mainstreaming the conversation beyond the environmental movement and
into the larger public conversation. That's quite a lot to
accomplish when confronting a wicked problem.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #92 of 221: Stefan Jones (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 18 07:30

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

I want to simultaneously write:

Sheesh, it has been a year already?

and

Cripes, that was one long year.

2017 more or less began with me going on my first political protest
since 1967 or so (most of that one was in a stroller),  and more or
less ended with getting hit by a car (not badly,) with my career
ending (just a year or so earlier than I hoped) in between. I've
given up on thinking about the future more than tactically. I'm
currently feeling mildly optimistic; I'm pinning my hopes that
something like  Enantiodromia will result in progressives getting
their asses in gear and at least put a check on Trump. Doing my bit
volunteering for a local political party, helping with press
releases and social media and such. Quite a change from software
testing.

I'm not sure what to think of learning algorithms and such. On one
hand, my career started amidst early-90s WIRED gushiness and
witnessed the Dot Com era bust and a financial smackdown; I am thus
a bit skeptical of pronouncements about Game Changers. OTOH, maybe
this time the gushiness is validated and the damn things will be
used to cement the hegemony of greedheads and assholes.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #93 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 8 Jan 18 08:22

    
I share the hope that Urs expresses that cloud computing will make
it easy to do the right things to implement more secure computing.
Whether anyone has implement that yet is another question. This will
require a lot of good user-facing design as well as the high-tech
stuff he talks about. Neither Google nor Amazon has demonstrated yet
that they're on the right track to achieve this.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #94 of 221: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 8 Jan 18 10:02

    
am amused that i received a '404' error message with #87. what could
go wrong?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #95 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 18 10:11

    
Try this:
https://cloud.withgoogle.com/build/infrastructure/then-now-google-history-urs-
h%C3%B6lzle/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #96 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Mon 8 Jan 18 10:50

    
Thanks for bringing in Maria Popova's piece, jon. I was deeply
heartened to see her addressing this question of current identity
politics on the first day of a new year. There are technological
revolutions, and there are re-framings of our human conceptions of
individual thread and social fabric, and whether it's noticed or
not, these are not separate realms of change. Not-noticing is not
erasure.
I've been known at times to mutter: "Architecture is fate." We live
in a built environment of structures, ideas, symbolically mediated
exchanges of value (bitcoin, paper money, Wall Street valuations).
But it is human longings, whether for power or connection or safety
or [x,y,z] that thus far are still building these structures. And
the  whole history of them makes the shiny new city as much as it
shapes Rome, Damascus, Xian, and London.    
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #97 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Mon 8 Jan 18 12:57

    
> "Architecture is fate."

That statement spurs me to mention an unusual bright spot.  In a
former life, I did town architectural history surveys, a job that
required me to look carefully at 10s of thousands of buildings -
this was back in the 1980s.  

It quickly became obvious to me that once you filtered out the
relatively tiny number of serious architect-designed buildings, most
houses build in the US built since 1930 or so ranged from banal to
hideous.  And this was not true of buildings built before 1930. 
WTF?

After I moved on from that job, things got even worse as we entered
the mini-mansion era.

Now suddenly we're building some very nice houses in the US again,
mostly revivals of c. 1880-1925 styles.  What this means about the
zeitgeist, I don't know, but if architecture mirrors the spirit of
the culture, maybe it's hopeful.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #98 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Mon 8 Jan 18 13:50

    
Nice observation, that. I hadn't really tracked that new non-cookie
cutter buildings are getting better. (I certainly was awestruck by
the sheer inventiveness of the big buildings on the new side of the
river in Shanghai...   an architects' wild playground, it looked;
but that's different from what I think you're talking about here.)
The period you mention ranges from Victorian to Frank Lloyd Wright,
so more than one useful model. 

I remain grateful every time I see an old WPA construction. Increase
of beauty as well as utility was part of the presumption.

I've long wondered about the relationship of the Maker culture to
William Morris et al.  While it can sometimes feel the dominant
ethos is bread & circus passivity and screen-hypnosis,
post-industrial aridity is also awakening, in at least some, old
thirsts for a world in which some human hand and thought and feeling
are evident. 


(for anyone who didn't look at the Maria Popova piece mentioned
above, by the way, it argues for a wider and Whitmanesque, not
narrowly fragmented, possibility of identity.)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #99 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 8 Jan 18 21:26

    
The show of Walker Evans's work we saw a few weeks ago reminded me
that he worked on a project that reviewed and recorded some aspects
of the history of the architecture of American homes.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #100 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 18 23:49

    
*Here's an add-on to Christopher Brown's anecdote about visiting a
small Mexican town that has two names for two different tracks of
history.

*Instead of getting all atemporal by mixing and matching the time
they're in, they're switching the government on and off.  They're so
harassed by narcocultura that they've hired militia and built a
walled community to guard the avocados.

https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/07/world/americas/mexico-state-corruption.html


*Sure puts a twist on the old hipster avocado toast.  Now you can
have blood-money avocados with legal marijuana.  Legal except for
Jeff Sessions, that is.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #101 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 18 00:30

    

*Nice housing discussion.  Everybody always says that the
architecture of two generations ago is beautiful, refined and noble
while their own is cheap commercial trash.  John Ruskin may have
been the pioneer here.  He hated cast iron worse than most people
hate plastic.

*If you’re into Internet of Things housing issues, I’ve got a Tumblr
about that.  It’s more or less about the future home automation
environment, the domestic lived experience of computational spaces, 
and it’s extremely dry and technical.   It must be the most
tediously technical thing I’ve ever personally assembled.  It’s
really into the harsh minutiae of stuff like LoRan and Lidar and
LiFi.

https://www.tumblr.com/blog/wolfliving
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #102 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 18 00:32

    

*I used to wonder why authors I admired, who’d been so dazzling,
wide-scale and inventive in their youth, somehow turned into
sententious, pedantic know-it-all geezers, going on and on about
devil-in-the-details grit that would make young idealists crazy. 
Nowadays I understand that process.   

*I do have a life-hack for that — I just go live in places where I
don’t understand a goddamn thing.   That promptly gets rid of the
“know it all” problem, but like a lot of hacks, it doesn’t resolve
the underlying issue.   Because I’m still old — I have acquired the
habits of mind of an older person.  Even when tackling some topic or
situation entirely new to me, I still want to bog down in the fiddly
bits.  That’s a metabolic issue, it’s the way the neural nets have
slowly settled inside their bone black-box.

*One might construe this as rather sad, but since it’s part of the
human condition, it’s also quite funny.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #103 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 18 00:34

    

*Still in Ibiza.  You could not pay me to go get blisteringly high
and obtain some ecstatic release boogying in a night-club here.  
“Having fun,” that is to say.  No way.

*How the DJs get paid in Ibiza, what other local scenes the DJs come
from, those topics interest me.   What people wear that is novel and
different, I notice that. Self-serving memoirs by the aging hippies
who own the nightclubs of Ibiza, there I might actually pay some
attention.

https://pikesibiza.com/blog/read-an-exclusive-extract-from-mr-pikes/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #104 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 18 00:46

    

*Here the Ibiza night-club entrepreneur, who is of course an
ultraviolet, globe-hopping hipster of the rankest description, an
Australian dude into yachts, party girls and Mercedes staff cars,
decides to get himself a house on the island where he’s dazzling his
customers with laser light-shows and blasting amplifiers.

*So of course he has to buy himself some ancient, crumbling, 
off-the-grid, John Ruskin heap.  A literal Spanish farm cottage. 
“The heart wants what it wants,” right, but there’s something
hilarious about such human perversity.  The guy gives up his seaside
penthouse to do this to himself.  

 If you’re on the WELL SoTW to ramble about futurity, but you’re
secretly thinking, “Wow, I really want to live in that 1920s stucco
bungalow, ’cause it’s so soulful,” you would profit by reading this.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #105 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 18 00:48

    

MR PIKES, the Story Behind the Ibiza Legend, Tony Pike

“That’s when I spotted a 500-year-old finca near San Antonio for
sale in a tiny real estate office. Price on application. The
property was set in a couple of acres and for sale at six million
pesetas (around £40,000 back then). We drove up to see it and found
an abandoned house, with an original olive mill and flour mill, but
no water or electricity. I had a feeling about it, though.
(((Uh-oh.)))

I felt the house had an irresistible charm to it, but I wanted to
improve the look of it. I could see the potential, not for a hotel
but as a fine country-style house for my private life. I still felt
full of vitality and ambition, not for money or power but for a new
way of living.

“The thing that hit me was it was so open. Not a case of, if you sit
in this space between 2pm and 4pm you’ll get sun. Sun all the time. 
The finca was called Can Pep Toniet, which means ‘the property of
little Tony’. When I found out I was flabbergasted.  (((Because his
name is “Tony Pike,” you see.  It’s an identity issue.)))

I paid a deposit.

The finca was just not habitable. It had been used to process the
local farmers’ grain and olive crops, but it had not been lived in
for 15 years. It was six months before we could  move in. Hard,
filthy, dangerous work, having to climb down into the stores and
clean out centuries of dust and pollen. Caked in shit, and no water
to wash with. 

Upstairs had flooring, but downstairs was still a dirt floor. Señor
José Pratz-e-Pratz was the owner and previously his family had lived
in it for centuries, the only family that had ever lived there.
There was no toilet so I bought the best toilet seat I could find
and fixed it on to a pomegranate tree, and dug a big hole. You could
sit and shit on that, looking out at the whole of San Antonio. The
tree grew too. Natural fertilizer.

The finca was so basic. The ceiling was decaying. The compressed
rock filled with clay was deteriorating into black dust. It was
filthy and dangerous. The roof was made from ash, seaweed and soil.
There was no electricity, we lived with oil lamps and a gravity-fed
water pump for a year.  No electricity meant using an old Singer
Treadle sewing machine, and I became quite adept at making curtains
and cushions.

We couldn’t get permissions to change things formally so I just
started fixing it myself. …. (((etc etc oh my God why, etc)))
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #106 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 9 Jan 18 04:39

    
>Housing

Standing in front of 10s of thousands of buildings with a clipboard
and thinking "what about it?" sort of gets you beyond superficial
matters of taste.  That's why I was so struck by the fall-off in
quality post-1930. 

For example, I personally dislike the Georgian style of
architecture, which I find overly symmetrical and sort of leaden. 
But that doesn't mean all Georgian buildings are ugly, it just means
there are qualities in the style that don't work for me personally.
If someone told me that they admired the style for its dignity and
sense of solidity I'd have no argument with them. 

But I just can't see how anyone could stand in front of, say, a
post-war split-level Colonial or a 1980s mini-mansion with six
different types of windows and think "Wow, what a beautiful piece of
architecture."  Style is a matter of taste, but bad is just bad.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #107 of 221: Brian Slesinksy (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 18 05:57

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Getting back to the discussion of moral relativism: since leaving
Google I've been reading about the Civil War and (skipping ahead)
the Civil Rights era.

The Civil War era feels pretty ancient, but one thing struck me:
morally speaking, the abolitionist's arguments didn't feel foreign
at all, what they said just seemed obvious. And the South? Obviously
indefensible. But not in an unfamiliar way, no, it just sounded like
the usual self-justifying crap. The only surprising part is that
before the Civil War it was *expansionist* racist crap; they wanted
to spread slavery to as many places as possible. Which pretty much
led to the war.

I'm suspicious of the whole moral relativism thing because it seems
like suffering is ancient, is easily recognizable, and hasn't
changed much. At least some people will see it, some of the time.
The difference is more about what level of suffering is accepted as
normal and whether they think they can or should do anything about
it. People live with what they think they have to live with. Later,
they may come to wonder how they could have lived that way.

Even today, depending on where you go, who you're connected to, and
what you're trying to get done, you might have to learn to ignore a
whole lot of suffering, for lack of clear answers as to what to do
about it. Our ways of either paying attention to or ignoring
suffering have become rather advanced.

Stories about time travelers are often power fantasies: look what a
flap of butterfly wings can do! But this is random, uncontrollable
power, so a time traveller would end up learning to ignore things,
too.

We are all time travelers at one second per second. I wonder what
suffering we currently ignore that will seem strange in the future?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #108 of 221: Stefan Jones (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 18 05:58

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

Chuck Wendig's Twitter thread about ambulatory robots is a hoot:

https://twitter.com/ChuckWendig/status/950517393738158081

One of those things that is simultaneously hilarious and makes you
want to hole up on the couch and rewatch Steven Universe episodes
until you forget about reality.

You just gotta know that in ten years those prancing quadruped bots
are going to be in charge of kettling protestors, shooting fleeing
people in the back, and harassing guys who sell loosies.

I think the Maker movement should be all over creating anti-robot
weapons. Get on that right away. Milled fiber dispersers to short
out their electronics. Bolas to tangle those prancing little legs.
Paint bombs.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #109 of 221: Andrew Hudson (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 18 06:05

    
Via email from Andrew Hudson:

Hi WELL, Jon, Bruce,

Long time SotW reader, first time writer. I felt compelled to weigh
in this year by the discourse on libertarianism. It seems bizarre to
me that, of all our calamitous political happenings, we are talking
about libertarianism. I'm not sure libertarianism has been more
politically irrelevant or intellectually bankrupt in decades, in
perhaps 100 years of American political life. After all:

1) The most classically liberal policies of recent memory proven an
utter farce in Brownback's Kansas.

2) Paul Ryan and other great intellectual proponents of shrinking
government revealed themselves to be nothing but mercenaries for the
1% by taking up tax reform and leaving the tax code more convoluted,
nonsensical and onerous than they found it, all a mad dash to loot
as much wealth as possible and thrust it into the hands of the
already super rich.  For the right in the age of Trump,
smash-and-grab class warfare and racial animus eat ideology for
breakfast.

3) Classical liberalism's globalized progeny neoliberalism has
become so maligned by millennials on both the left and the right
that shellshocked pundits have started likening the word
"neoliberal" to racial slurs.

4) the "energized" political movement of 2017 wasn't libertarianism
at all but socialism, with hockey-stick growth in once bookish
organizations like the DSA, an out socialist taking down a major GOP
leader in Virginia's off-year elections, and an online culture that
is quickly outpacing the right in its complexity, obsessions and
weirdness. Tens of thousands of millennials who thought Bernie
Sanders was pretty cool in 2016 have spent 2017 starting Marxist
reading groups, applying Momentum-style organizing techniques in
dozens of cities, and wearing red hammer-and-sickle t-shirts to
repair brakelights in police-ravaged neighborhoods. What exactly
have libertarians been up to other than dumping dark money into
laughable orgs like TPUSA, which try to convince young people to
love capitalism by...misusing memes and wearing diapers?

And most importantly, 5) climate change! Libertarians have zero
credible ideas about saving the planet from catastrophic climate
disaster other than "hope Elon Musk sorts it out." Meanwhile the
rest of us are quickly coming around to the obvious: that we can't
stop climate change without defeating capitalism first. And
therefore the political battles that for boomers and Xers were about
values and cultural wars are for millennials and younger about plain
old survival. Maybe if we had a time machine, and could bring the
sustainability posturing of some of today's corporate luminaries
back to, say, 1960, we could have kept emissions from getting out of
hand and let capitalism trundle along. But we're way past that now,
and if American socialists don't win enough political power in the
next decade to enact radical anti-capitalist environmental reforms,
we'll be in for a lot of dangerous geoengineering and Chinese-style
sustainability authoritarianism to get the atmosphere back in
human-habitable shape—if that's even possible.

Well I've added way more words than I had planned to a discussion
that I didn't even think we should be entertaining. Thanks all for
the enlightening meditations on Ibiza, chess, and time-traveling
cannibals.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #110 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 18 06:31

    
Andrew: From my perspective, the very reason to talk about
libertarianism is its use as an excuse for shrinking government, and
the way it has called to question the role of government. 

I'm finding it hard to see that socialism has any power base at the
moment - so while an socialist opposition may be "energized" by
protest, they haven't found any meaningful way to take or
redistribute power. And I don't know that old-school Marxism and
socialism is the best solution. We should be able to re-think our
politics in the 21st century and find balance, emphasizing a
commons-based, cooperative approach to governance.

And climate change totally hasn't been addressed, not because of
libertarian opposition but because of powerful economic interests
unwilling to confront climate reality because, to them, a valid
response (e.g. end the burn) would be an existential threat. And
that problem's not being addressed very well by anybody of any
ideology.

This week I hope to have conversations about the commons, human
interdependence, and co-operation, the antithesis of libertarianism.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #111 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 9 Jan 18 07:43

    
Libertarianism has two constituencies (other than people using it as
an excuse for looting, etc.).  It resonates well with the "you are
not the boss of me" attitudes that are part of blue-collar America's
core culture.  It also attracts people who are highly intelligent,
educated and cerebral.  It is intellectually elegant, especially in
contrast to the mix of markets, government regulation, and
corruption that are the norm.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #112 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 9 Jan 18 08:04

    
Which of those two motivations prompted Charles Koch to bankroll the
founding of the Cato Institute?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #113 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 9 Jan 18 08:56

    
I believe that would fall under "an excuse for looting, etc." but
I've been called a cynic.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #114 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 9 Jan 18 12:03

    
appreciate your contributing, Andrew.

And looking forward to reading thoughts on those further topics,
Jon. The commons, interdependence, et al--what is unboundaried is so
often what is left voiceless.

Sounds like that Ibiza finca has some catch up learning (in Stewart
Brand's term) to do. Which leads me to think -- after his title "How
Buildings Learn" -- if it might be interesting here to ponder "How
Do Political Systems Learn"?

Last, Bruce, appreciated your ponderings about elders and how
thinking changes with age. The neuroscientists sometimes have
offered a different/opposite description: that older brains grow
(for a time) stronger at globalized thinking, as memory/particulars
get less strong/quick.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #115 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 9 Jan 18 12:13

    
(just wanted to add-- I'm grateful this conversation is not about
the state of the world in only the standard political terms, and
wouldn't want to see it turn into only that.)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #116 of 221: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Tue 9 Jan 18 13:05

    
Libertarianism, socialism... might there not be some hope in
tinkering away at the current system, even if it is a bloated and
ungainly beast?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #117 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 9 Jan 18 13:58

    
I'm a muddletarian.  I think the best system possible is an
inelegant muddle.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #118 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 9 Jan 18 14:44

    
Don't know if it's the "best" Mark, but most def where we are. 

And that's probably good, all things considered. 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #119 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 9 Jan 18 15:47

    
Well, it's different from being (shudder) a moderate.  Simple,
intellectually elegant systems are more prone to going off the
rails.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #120 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 9 Jan 18 18:12

    
That's what happens in a pluralistic society. No simple solution
comes close to serving everyone well.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #121 of 221: Stefan Jones (jonl) Wed 10 Jan 18 07:08

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

Regarding Muddletarianism, there is a Stewart Brand quote I adore.
It appeared in a review hidden away in the Last Whole Earth Catalog:

"We're generally down on Utopian thinking around here, holding to a
more evolutionary fiasco-by-fiasco approach to perfection."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #122 of 221: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Wed 10 Jan 18 07:09

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

I'm surprised we haven't talked much about computer security yet.

In 2017 ransomware hit the big time with hackers (possibly from
North Korea) shaking down power companies and airports and hospitals
for Bitcoin. And it could have been much worse, except for a lucky
bug.

Also, the Equifax breach leaked 140 million American's social
security numbers.

Also, hackers tried to steal the French presidential election, but
they failed so never mind, next crisis.

2018 is getting off to an early start with the discovery of a
fundamental design flaw in basically all CPU's (Meltdown / Spectre).
Apparently, the pressure to build faster CPU's is so intense that
even if-statements aren't safe.

Meanwhile, this whole notion of researching "friendly AI" seems so
charmingly naive. It's like if we can tell everyone how to do it,
there will be a gentleman's agreement to keep these AI's under
control. Somehow I don't think North Korea's hackers will agree to
that, and I don't think they'll care much whether it's "real AI" or
not, so long as it does the job. You don't need AI to have a mind of
its own for it to be weaponized.

Mark Levine likes to make the sarcastic claim that it's the nature
of all Bitcoin exchanges to be hacked. I wonder if he's not thinking
big enough?

I expect it will be increasingly attractive to make computer
security the problem of some other organization that seems to know
what it's doing, whether it's CloudFlare or Google Cloud or Estonia.
This is how Big Tech gets bigger and decentralization loses. Even
when they do get hacked they have a leet team of hackers standing by
to fix it; what does your server in the closet have? Some unknown
electronics firm from Shenzhen or hippie retrocomputing collective
isn't going to cut it.

Also, lots of people are angry at social networks right now, but
what if they actually got *good* at filter bubbles? The customers
are demanding more protection, not less, so eventually someone will
give them what they want.

Or maybe just get rid of social networks altogether? It seems that
some people are happy to have a microphone and speaker in their home
from a trusted company. It answers questions. It plays music. It's
cheap, kid-safe, non-addictive, and doesn't let spam or nasty
politics in. Yet.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #123 of 221: fiasco-by-fiasco approach to perfection (banjojohn) Wed 10 Jan 18 07:28

    
Corporations brought us into a new geologic era. That doesn't happen
very often. Extinction events event less frequent. 

"The current rate of extinction of species is estimated at 100 to
1,000 times higher than natural background rates." wikipedia

My Dad used to tell me, when I was  a wee lad in the 1960's, that
all world religions(and enlightened humans such as Jesus of Nazareth
and Gautama Buddha) held the same basic set of morals, and that
stewardship of the Earth was one of these. 

 

It troubles me that modern man has rationalized away that
responsibility. I can't understand how anyone could consider an
extinction event as anything less than an organizing principle of
the highest urgency. 

I wonder how the Karankawa felt about protecting Mother Earth? 

    
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #124 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:38

    
#122 Hey Brian, we gave up on any notion of security during last
year's SOTW

But, good points....shuddering time to be operating a company that
actually requires computer security -- that would be ALL of them :)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #125 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:39

    
Seeing a general stepping down of technology...folks going back one
or two gens of tech in order to get something that actually works.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #126 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:40

    
Hey John, that's the issue isn't it: antropocene or holocene...its
all obscene
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #127 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:44

    
Somehow the one thing that all these topics seem to share is a
failure or misalignment of feedback mechanisms.

The Google program learning chess in four days, and the
"middletarian" idea, remind me of a snippet of a radio show I heard
recently where someone was trying to explain where the
'intelligence' of an ant colony resides.  The answer was that it
isn't anywhere - it's just an emergent property of all the ants
blundering about.  They are in possession of a communication
mechanism (dropping pheromone trails), and over time, they don't
become less blunderous as individuals, it's just that the cumulative
feedback creates patterns and emergent properties.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #128 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:47

    
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karankawa_people

https://books.google.com/books?id=BmEMbNMfB2MC&pg=PA3&lpg=PA3&dq=karankawa+and
+mother+earth&source=bl&ots=H2H3mTaCfx&sig=PkVAisadKGFUn2CVMtzGE-QwMfg&hl=en&s
a=X&ved=0ahUKEwiU7cXf-M3YAhWJGZQKHRUACXAQ6AEIaTAO#v=onepage&q=karankawa%20and%
20mother%20earth&f=false

"..it happens because person after person witnesses and  bears
witness to the crimes of the State against people, against the
Earth, against all it oppresses. But there must be those who will
bear this witness, who will speak out, and who will give others
courage to speak out in their wake."

Such as just witnessed at the Golden Globes!!! 

And, we have not talked about 2018 in regards to women coming to
power in America....yeehah!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #129 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 10 Jan 18 09:55

    
The Twitterati have been complaining that there was too much hype in
2017 about certain techno topics. 1.  “Bots” — meaning
conversational systems.  2.  AI or deep learning and 3. Way too much
about crypto coinage.  Meaning that these were the big tech fads of
last year.

Odd that nobody complains that robots are faddish and over-hyped,
even though robots have been radically over-hyped since 1921.  Jeff
Bezos is buying and deploying more and commercial robots to sort and
move his Amazon cargo, but you don’t see that many, every day,
real-deal, non-fad, non-hyped robots, walking about in the street in
2018.  

The robots on YouTube get a lot of viral traction, but they’re
expensive one-offs from the lab.  Robot battles on TV are pretty
popular, but they’re basically destruction-derby for nerds.

It’s like robots are simply too old to be fads.  Robots possess a
get-out-of-hype-jail free card.  People don’t scoff at robots and
their prospects.  They’re respectful of them; afraid of them, even.
 
I’ve been writing about the prospects of robots in  for decades, and
I guess I ought to be more cynical, but for 2018, even I am kind of
bullish on tomorrow’s robot business.  In Europe “Industry 4.0” is
getting traction, and it’s mostly about new platforms and protocols
for automating production.   It’s the “Internet of Things” as
re-imagined by German heavy industry.

If you describe “robots,” not as a smart metal man who can walk and
talk about Asimov’s ethics up on stage, but as “actuated, moving
mechanisms programmable in two or more axes with a degree of
autonomy,” then, well, there’s something to that.   Industrial
robots are getting more accurate, more capable, more durable,
cheaper. 

 I’m a devotee of commercial, consumer robot vacuum cleaners.  As a
guy troubled with hay fever, my Roomba’s ability to sweep up
particulates that I can’t see is a genuine asset to my life.    It’s
even worth the considerable trouble of cleaning and maintaining the
Roomba, which is often a dirtier and more troublesome task than
simply vacuuming the room yourself.  So I expect to have at least
one real-world, non-hyped, everyday robot around for the foreseeable
future.  I wonder what the second will be.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #130 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 10 Jan 18 10:47

    
I guess the overuse of the term "big data" was a complaint a few
years ago. The problems that prompted that overuse haven't gone
away, and AI-based approaches are making them worse.

There were warnings in the margins of the Whole Earth Catalog that
"The map is not the territory!" The art of data analysis is in
choosing items that are available from a data store - a Web user's
click stream, a voter registration database, a credit card's
transaction log - and using those data as proxies for a person's
intent and desires.

This mapping from data to thought is imperfect at best. Too often
people use the map as if it were the territory, with bad results
that Cathy O'Neil illustrated with war stories in her book "Weapons
of Math Destruction". This only gets worse with AI-based data
analysis, because the mappings become more complicated and the logic
through which they are derived is opaque, hidden within the AI
agent. If the proxies aren't understandable and verifiable by human
analysts, we're wrong to trust the mappings they represent.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #131 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 10 Jan 18 10:54

    
*Speaking of the imaginary "FemmeCoin," turns out there's a
crypto-coinage "Women Coin" that has existed since summer of 2017. 
Doesn't seem to be particularly feminist in its orientation, it's
just for women who want to get in on the racket.

https://bitcoingarden.org/forum/index.php?topic=16213.msg168495

*I'm always happy when I've "predicted" something that already
exists.  Nobody can know everything, but when it turns out that the
future is already here and just wasn't distributed where you
yourself could see it, that means that your mode of analysis is
good.  

"This may seem a tad sci-fi, far-fetched, and mind-stretchy, but...
hey look, it's already there.  Swell!"
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #132 of 221: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 10 Jan 18 11:03

    
my surrogate little bro is behind this 'white allies toolkit', an
empathetic/nonviolent communucation/active listening modality for
dealing with race

https://www.whiteallytoolkit.com/philosophy/

seems to be getting some traction
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #133 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 10 Jan 18 11:26

    
http://fortune.com/2018/01/09/2017-fires-hurricanes-natural-disasters-cost/

The USA suffered $306 billion in weather damage in 2017.  

Luckily the USA doesn't border on Greenland, so if glaciers are
melting, the readers of FORTUNE magazine won't have to pick up any
tab for that.

Huge mudslides in California this week, so the bill for 2018 must be
off to a galloping start.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #134 of 221: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 10 Jan 18 11:32

    
and oh, wrt #132, shorthand for 'race, what a mess, here's someone
doing something a little bit novel about it'

i do so miss the viridian mailing list when climate disaster moments
like santa barbara (the fires, the floods, the mudslides) happen
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #135 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 10 Jan 18 12:04

    
*Here's some Women Coin pics.  Apparently it's entirely possible to
buy some Women Coins right now and put them in your crypto "purse."

https://ello.co/bruces/post/qoxbqgetwzklde6ojjxtqa
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #136 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 12:24

    
Not doing so hot against US dollar...but, it's early days
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #137 of 221: Harry Henderson (hrh) Wed 10 Jan 18 14:15

    
With regard to AI, I think we're still trapped by the image of AI as
being some kind of ego like our own, only massively more
intelligent. (After all, this is ingrained in us ... the other word
for this is "God"). So with this image, we talk about somehow
controlling or at least placating "God."

However the much more likely scenario is that artificial cognition
(not necessarily "consciousness") will be distributed and pervasive,
and that it's already "out of control." The question then isn't
whether we can control "AI" but what kind of intelligence will
emerge and what part our own particular human kind of consciousness
might continue to play in it.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #138 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 10 Jan 18 14:53

    
I agree with that, which is why hearing about the blundering ants
struck me as relevant.  And if you're looking for distributed and
pervasive cognition, not "intelligence," why even limit your search
to machines?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #139 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 15:32

    
<The question then isn't
whether we can control "AI" but what kind of intelligence will
emerge and what part our own particular human kind of consciousness
might continue to play in it.

Yup...there are at least two strands to that from the human point of
view....our own co-evolution as well as how we chose to "use" AI as
a tool and how we choose to integrate with it.

And then there is the 'conscious development' of AI
itself...whatever that turns out to be.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #140 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 15:34

    
David, great point, do you have some suggestions or examples?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #141 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 10 Jan 18 15:44

    
Well it's such a broad net that it goes way off into other areas,
but I was thinking how a business operates, a corporation, an
economy...
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #142 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 10 Jan 18 15:57

    
Or entirely out of the realm of machines or artificial anything, the
body's immune system.

In politics, once the Access Hollywood tape was out, and then Trump
won, you couldn't precisely predict the women's march and pussy
hats, but it was clear that the whole thing had provoked a
distributed response.  As events over the year have proceeded, it's
looked as much to me like an immune response as anything else.  The
depleted toxic strain (sad!) was introduced to the system, and once
the antibodies recognized it, they started responding to multiple
infections everywhere.  Does the Body Politic really need a leader
or intelligence to functionally cognate and act?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #143 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 10 Jan 18 17:27

    
Kewl...a systems/complexity viewpoint...makes sense to me
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #144 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 11 Jan 18 00:39

    
(jonl) Platform cooperatism was on your top ten list....could you
talk a bit more about that....has this got the "wobbly potential" of
the early 1900's

https://www.iww.org/history/icons/wobbly
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #145 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 11 Jan 18 00:41

    
Alongside the platform movement are the many communities of
practice, doing good work (g)locally...do you hold out much hope for
more and more networks of people of good will connecting around
issues on cooperative platforms that get work done.  Examples???
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #146 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 11 Jan 18 00:43

    
One of the fascinating aspects of the cryptocurrencies is that the
move has been to establish the currency first without some grand
economic system....kind of 'plug and play'. I gather the idea is
that the currency will fit and adapt to any model, new or old.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #147 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 11 Jan 18 00:50

    
Which brings up the Blockchain, which starts with "B", which rhymes
with "D", which stands for Data (as well as the mobile programming
language).

Privacy, or the lack thereof, is still a big issue, with an
important vote today in Washington....could the blockchain,
Holochain, or "tangled" be part of the solution to the problem of
"who's data is it anyway?".

I don't mind shipping all my data to NSA, knowingly, or just let
Google and Facebook do it for me at midnight :). Just as long as it
is clear that it is MY data....I will settle for a digital time
stamp.

However, we live in a more robust digital universe than that. I
would like all my data, and my children's and grand children's data
set in 'digital stone' enabling an educational, vocational and
personal porfolio which can be accepted as verified, true and
trustworthy as a representation of my identity and work....my own
personal Wikipedia...with which I can share with others, a true and
accurate portrayal of my digital AND flatland selves.  Is it
possible, doable, and a good path to pursue, or can everything be
spoofed now...

Is Fake more real than REAL??
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #148 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 11 Jan 18 03:27

    
re 'women coins', there are also now Press Coins. "PressCoin is a
large, ambitious project to build an alternative global media
ecosystem." Always nice to have a grand vision.

https://www.presscoin.com/whitepaper/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #149 of 221: Brian Slesinksy (jonl) Thu 11 Jan 18 06:42

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Speaking of architecture:

"[...] malls often make prime targets for housing developments —
they tend to be located in convenient, transit-accessible areas but
aren’t close enough to residential neighborhoods to stoke NIMBY
complaints, said urban development expert Richard Florida, a
professor at the University of Toronto and author of 'The New Urban
Crisis.'

"A single defunct mall can become host to thousands of new housing
units as part of a mixed-used development, giving residents easy
access to stores and other amenities as well as a feeling of
community. But homes in revamped or brand new malls still are likely
to be out of reach for many workers in the Bay Area. Upscale Santana
Row, for example, offers little for less than about $2,500 a month,
according to Apartment Finder."

https://www.mercurynews.com/2018/01/08/shopping-for-a-home-head-to-the-mall/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #150 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 11 Jan 18 07:25

    
We've talked about AI and deep learning systems and other future
fascinations - but with all the brilliant technology at our
disposal, the flu virus is still kicking our ass every year. This
morning's headline: "Flu rampant in swaths of Texas." 7 adults dead
locally, many more statewide, 2 more months left in our flu season.
I've been sick for the last week myself, but with a different, less
malign virus. We had our influenza vaccinations, but one strain of
this year's virus, H3N2, apparently mutated and isn't responding
well to the vaccine. The flu is widespread nationwide.
https://gis.cdc.gov/grasp/fluview/main.html

Spread of flu would be mitigated somewhat by simple regular
handwashing. We're a nation with dirty hands.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #151 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 11 Jan 18 07:39

    
Ted asked about platform cooperativism. There are all sorts of
digital platforms emerging, some of which are for organizing work or
matching service providers to customers. Think Uber or Freelancer,
for that sort of targeted platform. Larger, more generalized
platforms are those like Amazon (for shopping) and Facebook (for
socializing). These examples are all owned and operated by
hierarchical (and some would say oligarchical) corporations: the
people who do the work are "managed" by a few at the top who make
the governance decisions and take the profits.

In co-operative business, the people who do the work participate in
governance and profits. It's a fair way to organize a business
democratically. "Rooted in democratic ownership,co-op members,
technologists, unionists, and freelancers create a concrete
near-future alternative to the extractive sharing economy."
https://platform.coop/about

Platform co-ops are new and buzzworthy. A friend of mine who
attended the annual platform co-op conference this year told me many
of the people there seemed to be more into the sexiness of the idea
and the platform capitalism aspect of it, than the co-operative
thinking. 

Democratic governance is not easy, and I suspect that this movement
will have failures along the way in confronting the inherent
difficulty of building and scaling. I'm part of a worker
co-operative digital agency, where we build website and web apps,
and we've done very well so far, partly because we're small and had
good consensus when we formed. A subset of our members are working
on building a platform co-op which will inherently have a larger
member base, and will be multi-stakeholder. I suspect that will be
more difficult to coordinate, but we're off to a good start.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #152 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 18 11:47

    

The winter holidays are  well over now,  The Christmas season is not
a big deal here in Ibiza, but there was commercial activity.
Families of snowbirds, mostly.

Now the town is radically de-populated.  There’s no tourist traffic
to speak of.  All the tourist retailers, the night clubs, the
fashion joints, the sellers of sunglasses and fridge magnets, they
just locked up shop and left.  I assume that they’re “on vacation,”
but I have to wonder — when you work to manage other people’s
vacations, where do you yourself go on vacation?  

Do you really want to subject yourself, as a tourist, to the dismal
racket that you run yourself?  Makes no sense, right?  When other
people’s fun is your business, where do you yourself go for some
rest and relaxation?  

Well, they’re gone now.  They’ll back around mid, late February, as
most of their closure signs say.   Maybe they’re writing novels.

You can still eat in Ibiza.  The groceries are open, the busses are
running.  It’s pretty, if a bit windy.   But you can walk around the
old-town tourist district, which in summer is just a throng of the
24hr Party People, and there’s maybe one human being per block. 
Sometimes you see some laundry on an upstairs flat.  

Other than that, Ibiza is handsome and quite empty.  Nothing but
architecture.  It’s NIMBY of a different sort: Nobody In My Back
Yard.

I guess I have to become my own DJ now.

https://soundcloud.com/bruces-4/sets/my-only-soundcloud-playlist-so
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #153 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 18 12:11

    
What if the Ibizan retailers never came back?  A lot of them aren’t
Ibizans at all, they’re foreigners, emigres, because, after all,
they’re selling stuff to foreigners.  So you can walk into a Spanish
design shop, and the clothes are Spanish, but the owner is Dutch and
the staffers are comely German girls, ex-go-go dancers with day-jobs
in retail.

If they all just left, and never returned,  they would board up the
town.  Ibiza would look like some abandoned silver-mining boom town
in the Rocky Mountains.  Everybody would tell the just-so story that
“they left through lack of economic opportunity.” But the Party
People ARE the ”economic opportunity.”  So it’s a tautology.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #154 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 18 12:11

    

I’m okay with tourism generally.  I tend to live in
tourist-attractive places.  Austin is a tourist center, Turin gets a
lot of cultural foot traffic, even Belgrade has a big music scene
and has had its happier decades as a part-time Paris for Communists.


But then there’s Venice, the fatal counter-example, which was
assassinated by tourists.  Maybe 60,000 tourist-serving staffers
left in Venice, a grumpy skeleton crew in what was once one of the
world’s lively and most culturally influential cities.   You can go
to Venice and buy the costumes, but there’s nothing much left BUT
costumes.  A simulacrum.  A museum of itself.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #155 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 18 12:12

    

When you talk about this problem, you immediately wander into areas
that the alt-right is staking out.  It’s Brexitania — the
foreigners, there’s too many of ‘em, I’m sick of the very sight of
‘em.  Away with ‘em by whatever means necessary — I’ll saw my own
arm off to get it out of their friendly grip.

But once they’re well and truly gone, and the “economic opportunity”
with ‘em, that’s when you realize that you’re living an abandoned
beach-side town from some Morrissey dirge.  “Every day is like
Sunday, every day is quiet and gray.”

And instead of everybody congratulating one another on their renewed
spiritual authenticity — “Hey look, we’re all Latvians again, let’s
celebrate!”  — they look around for a while, brows wrinkling, and
then vote with their feet.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #156 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 18 12:15

    

Had a pretty good day today working on the novel — and I put myself
in that situation for a reason, and it was a good idea, too — but
man, when the party’s over and they turn out the lights, the scene
gets melancholy.  When you're a bartender for a living, you come to
realize that every night finishes sad.  And the last to leave are
the least happy ones.

Those foreign exploiters, you can’t live with ‘em and you can’t live
without ‘em.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #157 of 221: Gerhard Stoltz (gstoltz) Thu 11 Jan 18 12:46

    
I was going to say something intelligent about the situation in
Norway. Then it sort of dawned on me that it wasn't in my ken to do
so.
So let me say something from the perspective of the slightly stupid
Norwegian.
Hey, we're doing great. We've digitized most of our interactions
with the government and our private sector companies. We're still
having a bit of a ruffle about the whole "should the govt. compete
with private enterprise or should private enterprise be allowed to
siphon off money as best as they can"-thing, but we're still
financially independent so we're not really Greece yet. 

We might have grown a bit decadent over the past 25 years or so, but
oil money does weird things to people and apparently most other
nations with it has done worse, so we must be doing something right.
Watching the UAE and other with horrid track records relating to
what we consider to be ethical behaviour take the forefront in
futurism feels kinda bad, but what is there to do about it? We are
the beneficiaries of a global environment that gives little to no
regard for cost as long as that cost can be externalized anyways, so
its not for us to throw stones now, is it? Its not as if my iPhone
was made by people with strong labor union representations, so what
to do?
I mean, personally i want to do the Tea Party thing in its original
intent to the extent that it is not detrimental to our ability to
compete locally and globally. Which basically means that it can't be
done. 

So yay. From where the slightly stupid norwegian sits the future
belongs to the rich, as it always has. And if you're not stupid you
can probably ride that current into a place where you're globally
competitive and disconnected from the needs of any one place meaning
you can disregard the need of the local. Though for how long can you
sell people on the disconnect from the local? If Greece is any
indication (yes its a slightly eurocentric indication) you can sell
them on it for five minutes longer than needed to dismantle it
beyond short term repair.


But yeah. I get to sit here on top of the working class world for
now. Entry level non-skilled labor is still approximately 40K USD a
year. Thats what oil does to you when you're integrated into the
western world and the social democratic way of thinking from the
outset. Also we paid off the US military machines with our
investment in F35's so we should be good, right?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #158 of 221: Administrivia (jonl) Thu 11 Jan 18 13:55

    
Just a reminder - if you're reading this and you're not a member of
the WELL, you can still post a comment or question by sending it to
inkwell at well.com.

If you want to post this link to this conversation, use
http://bit.ly/SOTW2018

If you're looking for Donald Trump, he's not here.

Keep coming back, this conversation has a two week run through next
Monday, January 15, Martin Luther King Day in the USA.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #159 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 18 00:03

    
*Norwegian?  If you're American, you can emigrate over there pronto!
Look, here's a Norwegian town whose mayors would be delighted to
have you!

http://www.emigrateme.com/#contact
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #160 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 18 00:04

    
The Prime Minister of Japan is in Estonia today.  He's engaging in
some kind of trade-with-Europe economic offensive.

https://news.err.ee/653707/abe-wants-tourist-visa-program-with-estonia-as-soon
-as-possible
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #161 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 18 00:10

    
https://automatica-munich.com/press/newsroom/press-releases/virtual-and-real-p
roduction-worlds-are-merging.html

*Here's some German robotics guys being technical and boring about
the prospects of robots in the methodical way that only German guys
can be.  You can see that they don't mention the robots dancing,
singing, answering deep moral questions, pretending to be sex
partners, tracking and killing people, almost none of that standard
cool sci-fi robot hype stuff.

*This is WHY I'm bullish on robotics for 2018; it's those numerous
humming, clicking areas where you realize the people involved just
aren't kidding.  They're not even bothering to hype themselves as
robot-guru thought leaders.  They're just trying to make the numbers
for the quarter.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #162 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 18 00:25

    
*This isn't exactly a "FemmeCoin," but it is a new all-girl, masked
Japanese pop group who sing "crypto pop" about virtual currencies. 


https://qz.com/1177249/japans-kasotsuka-shojo-the-worlds-first-cryptopop-group
-sings-about-bitcoin-and-cryptofraud/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #163 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 13 Jan 18 07:32

    
*Here goes Scotland, trying some small scale Universal Basic Income
experiments. This is probably the right way to go about it.  You
might want to try a neighborhood with a bunch of trust-fund kids in
it, because they're already on the private-capitalist version of UBI
and nobody complains about that.

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/scotland-is-trialling-universal-basic-i
ncome
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #164 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 13 Jan 18 07:50

    

*Foreign Policy” and their top ten simmering warfare areas for
Americans to fret about in 2018.


1. North Korea
2. Saudi-Arabia/Iran
3.  Myanmar, Bangladesh, Rohingya ethnic cleansing
4. Yemen
5. Afghanistan
6. Syria
7. “The Sahel” (((That’s a bargain, since it’s such a huge area)))
8. Congo
9. Ukraine
10. Venezuela

http://foreignpolicy.com/2018/01/02/10-conflicts-to-watch-in-2018/

*I don’t remember anybody fretting about a war in Ukraine before it
happened.  Now it seems that bored Ukraine veterans are showing up
in Bosnia.  Nobody’s been expecting any trouble in Bosnia, either. 
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #165 of 221: John Papola (jonl) Sun 14 Jan 18 06:14

    
John Papola responds to John Spears' post <65>:

I’ll take time to address each point. Thanks for the questions.

“Examples of competitive business systematically check bad behavior”

1) It was short-sellers that uncovered Enron’s malfeasance, not
regulators.

2) Increased trade between countries strongly correlates with a
reduction in military action. France and England are at war for
centuries. The fall of the corn laws opens trade between them.
They’ve been allies ever since. The US is nowhere remotely close to
war with China and the likelihood has declined steadily with our
trade. We don’t want to bomb our suppliers or our customers.

3) Jackie Robinson broke into all-white Baseball with the Brooklyn
Dodgers because the incentive to gain a competitive advantage
overpowered individual and racial prejudice, leading to small damn
break in African American baseball hires. No legislation. 

4) Gay marriage support flipped in corporate America before it
gained legal status and has never reached legislative success.

5) Apple launched the iPhone at $699 in 2007, at a time when they
were already a financial GIANT and had to immediately cut the price
by $200 due to weak demand. Even the mighty apple is not a
price-maker in a competitive market.

6) Opec couldn’t keep the price of gas from collapsing. Cartels are
not naturally eternal unless enforced by a single government/ agency
(like the SEC and credit rating agencies). The individual members
face STRONG incentives to undercut each other, dissolving the
cartel. Hence we have sub- $2.50 gas nearly 10 years AFTER the
“we’ve hit peak oil” hysterics of 2008.

These are a few examples off the top of my head, but they’re
countless and continual. “Customer service” is a term of art for a
reason. It’s because competitive firms MUST be of service to their
customers or they’ll walk out the door. This is really broad,
experiential stuff. Competition drives down prices, checking greed.
Competition encourages hiring of talent regardless of race, gender
or creed. Global trade puts us in touch with people who, under
politics, we are tribally encouraged to hate. Borders and national
identities are a political construct, not a business one.

Next…

"Well, while the military/prison budget has certainly grown in scale
and scope, public education and the social safety net have been
eviscerated. It's kind of a mixed bag, wouldn't you say?”

I have no idea where you’re getting this from. Safety net spending
is at or near all time highs, as is aggregate public education
spending. There were some small dips at the state level (under 2%)
following the Great Recession, but I believe those have returned to
trend growth. In education there are individual schools and cities
that are facing budget crises but they aren’t the result of spending
cuts, they’re the result of unsustainably structured public pensions
that induce super-early retirement with guaranteed benefits even as
the politicians spent all the money instead of investing it… and
when they did invest it, lied to everyone by assuming an 8% rate of
return.

https://www.vox.com/2015/3/25/8284637/school-spending-US

https://www.usgovernmentspending.com/entitlement_spending

Meanwhile, If you were dollar-cost-averaging your payroll taxes into
an index fund over the past 30 years, even given two stock market
crashes, you’d be WAY ahead of the empty social security system with
its empty public obfuscating lie called the “trust fund”.

I have no idea where you’ve gotten the idea that either entitlements
or education spending have been “eviscerated”, but it certainly is a
widely repeated fiction. This seems to be an ideological “what we
know that isn’t so” problem.

Next…

"How about the inequality, itself? Is that the fault of "big
gov'ment", too?”

I’ll set aside the snark and explain in broad strokes. First, the US
has the most progressive taxation in the OECD. So “the rich” are
already paying more of the government freight than in any other
country including Scandinavia, even accounting for the fact that our
richest people are richer than theirs. So tax policy is already
trying it’s darnedest to flatten the after-tax picture. (For better
or worse)

There has been a massive collection of bad government policies that
have regressive effects. Occupational licenses have exploded since
the 1950s, reducing opportunities for millions of Americans while
protecting incomes for incumbents. These are concentrated precisely
in the kinds of fields that sub-college educated working class
people, especially minorities, seek out. Healthcare and education
have grown in scale relative to other sectors of the economy and
both are highly regulated and cartelized by government policy.
Intellectual property law has for decades been a net drain,
empowering large firms and patent trolls with teams of lawyers and
deep pockets while strangling upstarts and smaller players who can’t
afford the legal fight. Lastly, government regulation and systematic
bailouts in finance have concentrated the industry, producing
outsized incomes and an oversized financial sector relative to a
freer, more competitive market. 

These forces don’t account for all of income inequality. But they’re
a big deal and a big blind spot for most people on the political
left who treat government like some college blackboard abstraction
that swoops in to magically fix “market failures” yet isn’t composed
of actual humans or government by actual politics itself.

Income inequality in and of itself is morally neutral. The fact that
Steve Jobs made more money than me doesn’t take anything away from
me. In fact, he did it by enriching my life and the lives of
millions around the globe. Being focused on inequality for its own
sake as opposed to specific unjust causes (which I am concerned
about) has a simple word: envy. And it’s a sin for a reason. The
world is not a zero-sum game. There are more people living better on
the planet today than every before. That’s people wealth is first
and foremost CREATED, not “distributed”.

Next...

"I would observe that reduction in government lead directly to the
Great Recession of 2008."

This is a much longer story, but this sentence is hogwash. Finance
is and was one of the most highly regulated sectors of the economy.
It also has the most systematic explicit and implicit government
bailout guarantees of any sector. The Fed. FDIC. The GSEs. A history
of creditor bailouts going back to Continental Illinois. Government
protects finances from losses, than induces it to take excessive
risks in an effort to buy votes, then it blames the free market for
the failures it induced.

Consider this: Canada had a dramatically freer banking system during
the 1930s (no deposit insurance, no central bank, no restrictions on
branch banking) and had ZERO bank failures during the Great
Depression. ZERO.

The notion that the 2008 financial crises was a result of
“deregulation” is yet another ideological “what we know that isn’t
so”. For example, the under-informed LOVE to point to the repeal of
Glass-Steagall as their primary cause. Only… ehem… most of the banks
that got into deep trouble were NOT actually subject to
Glass-Steagall because they were pure investment banks (Bear
Stearns, Lehman Bros, etc).

And then we have to contend with the Fed’s excessively easy monetary
policy in the 2000s that inflated a global bubble and then their
excessively tight policy in 2008/09 that may be the single biggest
reason for the downturn being so deep. The Fed isn’t a free market
institution.

The “we deregulated finance and got a financial crisis” is simply
fiction.

Next…

"Who has the most motivation to promote perpetual conflict? I would
say arms merchants and war profiteers, which are businesses, are
they not, seeking blind growth, while forsaking all other values?
Yet you place all the blame on the politicians, as opposed to those
who buy the politicians. Something is missing.”

Are you suggesting that lying to the public about the Lusitania, or
Gulf of Tonkin, or South American CIA ops, or WMD in Iraq is a crime
that should be primarily born by the profiteers rather than the
actual decision makers in political power? I’m not saying that
private actors don’t benefit from government action including war.
I’m saying the OPPOSITE. That the presence of a government ability
to deliver monopoly profits is the problem. What you’re saying is
that the shareholders of Enron should have gone to jail as being
more guilty than the executives. That’s incredible flip-flopped,
selective and sloppy accountability.

Can you give me any major examples of companies starting wars or
even engaging large scale military operations in the absence of
government?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #166 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 14 Jan 18 06:25

    <scribbled by jonl Sun 14 Jan 18 07:36>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #167 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 14 Jan 18 06:26

    
From the P2P Foundation Wiki, an analysis by John Ringland of
Generative Adversarial Networks vs Generative Cooperative Networks:
https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Generative_Adversarial_Network_vs_Generative_Co
op
erative_Network

"A GAN (generative adversarial network) generates more sophisticated
means of coercing and exploiting each other; based on the capacity
to control. E.g. a nationalist arms race generating advanced
military-industrial-media complexes, and all that comes with these.

"A GCN (generative cooperative network) generates more sophisticated
means of understanding and supporting each other; based on the
capacity to nurture. E.g. a peaceful society generating harmonious
networks of unified groups aligned around common needs and goals,
and all that comes with these.

"GAN --> power over, held together by competitive interactions.

"GCN --> power with, held together by common needs and goals.

"Real world systems are a complex mixture of these two principles.
For instance, in a forest each multi-cellular organism is a highly
refined GCN comprised of trillions of cells. Advanced organisms also
live in complex family or social groups which are also GCNs but less
tightly integrated. There may also be weak inter-species cooperative
networks. Aside from these, all organisms and species are engaged in
a competition to satisfy their basic needs; resulting in a wider
context GAN within which the many GCNs are embedded.

"Throughout biological evolution the primary integrating principle
was GCNs. It was cooperative networks that gave rise to higher
levels of organisation, eventually resulting in tightly integrated
collectives such as multi-cellular organisms.

"However in a human cultural context a new integrative principle has
emerged, which is primarily GAN with a veneer of GCN. I will call
these GHNs (generative hierarchical networks). These were famously
described by Machiavelli but had been evolving for aeons before him.
This principle creates organisations based on internal competition
rather than cooperation. It is a structure formed from interlocking
fear and distrust, leading to coerced conformity to ‘authority’.
There need be no shared goal, in fact the collective may act against
the interests of most of its members because lower levels of the
hierarchy are controlled by the upper levels."

* You should read the whole piece, which ultimately asks "how can we
enable and encourage the formation of GCNs within the existing GAN?
How could these bubbles form, grow, merge and eventually shift the
whole civilisation towards a more cooperative generative process."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #168 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sun 14 Jan 18 07:09

    
Fixing the link above:
<https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Generative_Adversarial_Network_vs_Generative_Co
operative_Network>

Fascinating way to address the exchange above.  That whole site and
organization looks really interesting.  Do you know any more about
who and what they are?


>Can you give me any major examples of companies starting wars or
even engaging large scale military operations in the absence of
government?

Any extractive industry entering new territory.  Wars against the
indigenous population.  Broadening the definition of war, wars
against the fabric and integrity of the ecosystem present at the
time of arrival.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #169 of 221: Bradley Westervelt (jonl) Sun 14 Jan 18 07:37

    
Via email from Bradley Westervelt

If atemporality had expired, it's seemingly now flexed back to life
from it's sour, decaying, blockchain free label, as some sort of
metaphor for the better inherent moral value of net neutrality. 

 And now I wonder, Bruce, were you ever not bullish on Robot and
robotics?

"Virtually Disappeared" Karankawa 1840's, via 1966
encampment/gravesite marker: 

https://www.galveston.com/blog/185/karankawa-indians-preserved-the-island-we-c
all-home/

Also a fan of the architecture discussion.  In the past, some of
this group were into studying disaster shelter improv's of various
kinds.  Despite mass exodus and refugee encampments continued
growth, I wonder where the UBI formulae goes, when factored in to
add humane shelter for the seemingly growing numbers of indigent. 
This guy seems to be advocating for a kind of indigenous support
angle to housing, relying more on participation from the hands of
the needy to custom construct from raw materials at hand.  And he
has an interesting blog on contemporary attempts on this age old
problem.   

https://www.engineeringforchange.org/news/emergency-shelter-for-the-people-fou
r-questions-with-tom-newby/

Puerto Rico also struck me as a prototypical harbinger.  Here on the
island of Hawaii there are frequent large acreage wildfires, often
attributed to be excessive due to a few decades of drought.  This
year rains from 'extra' tropical storms were welcomed.  But in our
4000 sq miles there's not 2 or 3 million like Jamaica or P.R., but
200,000 and one very large active volcano.  What we lack is soil,
and are 90% dependent on Jones Act cargo food via California ports. 


It's pretty damn tenuous.  Statehood and enormous military training
ranges all around provide a kind of nominal supply line security. 
But it feels like if tourism were to vanish, many would quickly turn
to the land and sea to provide.  Or leave: far more people born in
Hawaii have migrated to other states, than who still reside in the
islands.  

Bonus: this morning every mobile phone lit up with the urgent notice
to take shelter "this is not a drill" from an incoming NK Ballistic
Missile.  There are no Civil Defense shelters.  Politics have
precluded approval for many decades.  Anyway, turned out it was
nothing to interupt a round of golf over, thank goodness.  The first
all clear came to me via a retweet of Congresswoman Gabbard notice,
sent by Warren Ellis in England, Twitterati to the rescue!  The
perpetrators (EMA) didn't send an all clear until quite some time
later.

Particularly liked the nod to ageing versus getting hung up on the
details in creative expression. Thanks Jon, Bruce, et al. SOTW is
always a good annual mediation.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #170 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 14 Jan 18 07:47

    
Yeah, both Alaska and Hawaii rely on complex and expensive supply
chains.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #171 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 14 Jan 18 08:35

    
Here's a look underneath the hood of Ethereum: mining is complicated
and "miners aren't your friends."
https://blog.keep.network/miners-arent-your-friends-cde9b6e0e9ac
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #172 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 14 Jan 18 09:18

    
> Can you give me any major examples of companies starting wars
> or even engaging large scale military operations in the absence
> of government?

That's a trick question. We reserve the word "war" for conflicts
between nations. Companies supported the growth of government power
because they wanted government to fight wars on their behalf.

The wars of conquest in the Americas in the 15th through 17th
Centuries were conducted by entrepreneurs. The British East India
Company used its private army and navy to rule India and to protect
it from colonial competitors. Cecil Rhodes built private colonies
and used private police to control the pre-existing tribal
governments. Leopold II did the same in the Congo.

In the 20th Century imperialism changed character toward economic
exploitation that didn't require the overhead of running colonial
governments. Governments used military force on behalf of companies
that wanted economic concessions in places like Haiti, Nicaragua,
Iran, Guatemala, Cuba, and Chile. It makes no sense to say
"government bad, companies good" because companies succeeded in
getting government to do their dirty work for them and they
succeeded in getting others to pay for this work.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #173 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Sun 14 Jan 18 10:23

    
That's exactly the details of what I meant.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #174 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 14 Jan 18 13:59

    
*I'm pleased to semi-pirate this recent Jan 2018 cry of the heart
from the Nettime mailing list.  These Nettime guys have been at it
even longer than the WELL State of the World has.

*I used to post a lot of nettime commentary on the WELL, back in the
day when email lists were a hot, state of the art medium.  There
were even some YOYOW style arguments about whether this was a proper
thing to do, given that nettime are European media theory people,
tech art people and fringe academics, while WELLbeings were, like,
Californians, and therefore sinister tools of Silicon Valley, or
WIRED, or MONDO 2000, or at least Coevolution Quarterl.  Nettime
people, by stark contrast, were  into "critique."

So here we've got a screed from one of the nettime early guiding
spirits, Geert Lovink, and he's pointing out (with some useful
links)that now even Silicon Valley is upset about Silicon Valley,
too, so, like, what next?

I'm thinking the what is next is pretty obvious if you're European. 
This isn't the 1990s, and Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and
Microsoft aren't bulletin board systems or websites.  So yes, you do
in fact have to "start all over again," or at least start with an
understanding that you're confronting the richest and most popular
companies on the planet.  They have to be regulated, taxed and
fined.

A refusenik approach, "oh well I simply don't use Facebook," is like
some rural communard response in the 1960s, when some few among the
virtuous refused to watch television, drive cars and went to attempt
to live on farms.  

I'm thinking that the only genuine "radical" approach in the GAFAM
era is to bust trusts and put rich people in jail.  Probably
starting with the sinister likes of Travis Kalanick, but really, you
can't call yourself "radical" if you're willing to let moguls and
oligarchs control the means of digital production through
surveillance marketing.  And retiring to an off-the-grid houseboat
in Amsterdam, well, that's not gonna do it.

This means that, if you're a critic, "what's next" ought to be some
conceptual blueprint for a post GAFAM world.  What is it you want? 
If you just want an email list and maybe a bulletin board system,
nobody will stop you, but you're like a 16-mm film maker confronting
the vast hordes of YouTube and bragging that you did it all already.

And no, Facebook isn't the "ultimate dystopia," first because we
don't get any ultimates, and also because the BATs, Baidu Alibaba
Tencent, are waiting in the wings and they make American computer
companies in the era of Trump look as delusional as Fox News. 
Lively times!




From: Geert Lovink

Dear all,

social media criticism is clearly reaching a new stage. In the past
months voices from deep inside the industry have made themselves
heard, in particular in response to the fakenews/Russia media drama
and the sneaky ‘behaviour science’ manipulations of social media
users. 

None of these statements directly referred to the ‘classic’ critique
of the past years, let’s say from the nettime circle, Unlike Us, to
established voices such as Nicolas Carr, Andrew Keen and Sherry
Turkle. It’s as if we always have to start all over again. 

Most academic research on social media seems to have virtually no
impact on the current debate-at-large. Or am I wrong? Why do Silicon
Valley geeks and investors have so much authority in this case?
Insider-experts are not often seen as neutral observers. We all know
this. These individuals kept their mouth shut for years and years,
and are still deeply involved as investors, employees, consultants
etc. Now that they worry the world should suddenly pay attention?

What should be the radical next steps? Finally the social media
debate is heating up and becoming mainstream. What do we have on
offer from the perspective of old-school community informatics (RIP
Michael Gurstein), German (!) media theory, NL tactical media
activism and or ISEA-type of digital arts? Was this a topic in
Leipzig at 24C3? It seems pointless to say: “We told you so.” 

How can we scale up and democratize all the debates and proposals of
the past 5-7 years of those that worked on alternative network
architectures? Is the reasonable, noble and moral appeal a la Tim
Berners-Lee the only one on offer? Going offline is one thing, (and
in fact an option only elites can afford). Self-mastering a la
Sloterdijk is a marginal reform effort from a hyper-individualistic
perspective. 

I still believe in vital methods to mass delete Facebook accounts.
This is in the end what Silicon Valley tries to prevent at all cost:
resistance and exodus. How can such a momentum be unleashed?

Best, Geert

Antisocial media: why I decided to cut back on Facebook and
Instagram
https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2018/jan/01/antisocial-media-why-deci
ded-cut-back-facebook-instagram?CMP=share_btn_tw

John Battelle on Lost Context: How Did We End Up Here?
https://shift.newco.co/lost-context-how-did-we-end-up-here-fd680c0cb6da

Doc Searl: The human solution to Facebook’s machine-produced
problems also won’t work
https://medium.com/@dsearls/the-human-solution-to-facebooks-machine-produced-p
roblems-also-won-t-work-3364656bc257

Roger McHamee (early FB investor): How to Fix Facebook—Before It
Fixes Us
https://washingtonmonthly.com/magazine/january-february-march-2018/how-to-fix-
facebook-before-it-fixes-us/

Chris Taylor: Facebook just became the ultimate dystopia
http://mashable.com/2018/01/12/facebook-dystopia/?utm_cid=a-rr-entertainment#y
GXGQK95qkqT

Joshua Benton: If Facebook stops putting news in front of readers,
will readers bother to go looking for it?
http://www.niemanlab.org/2018/01/if-facebook-stops-putting-news-in-front-of-re
aders-will-readers-bother-to-go-looking-for-it/


#  distributed via <nettime>: no commercial use without permission
#  <nettime>  is a moderated mailing list for net criticism,
#  collaborative text filtering and cultural politics of the nets
#  more info: http://mx.kein.org/mailman/listinfo/nettime-l
#  archive: http://www.nettime.org contact: nettime@kein.org
#  @nettime_bot tweets mail w/ sender unless #ANON is in Subject:
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #175 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 14 Jan 18 15:55

    
Thanks to Geert Lovink for this extraordinarily rich set of pointers.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #176 of 221: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 14 Jan 18 17:59

    
i <heart> geert, always have
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #177 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 01:04

    
*The R. U. Sirius of Mondo 2000 predictions for the near-term
future.  The twenty-first century has had its effect on Ken.  He's
coming across almost elder-statesman here.

*And speaking of Ken Goffman, I'd like to take this small
opportunity to formally thank Ken for not foolishly dropping dead of
nootropics, or nutraceuticals, or massive overdoses of Vitamin C, or
any of that other stuff that was considered the acme of hip in the
heyday of Mondo 2000. Ken's demonstrated willingness to stay alive
into the sordid depths of the genuine 21st century has helped my
morale quite a lot. I hope he lives to be 95.

http://www.mondo2000.com/2017/12/29/predictions-for-the-future/
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #178 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 03:38

    
And, speaking of Nettime and things decdentralized - an open letter
to Mark Zuckerberg from Olivier Auber (
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olivier_Auber )

Open letter to Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook.

Hi Mark!

Best wishes and congratulations on your good resolutions 2018!

1) you tell us you have realized that "with the rise of a small
number of
big tech companies ? and governments using technology to watch their
citizens ? many people now believe technology only centralizes power
rather
than decentralizes it."

Only a belief? Isn't it a little real? And you're here for
something,
aren't you?

On top of that, you tell us that you are "interested to go deeper
and study
the positive and negative aspects of these technologies (of
decentralization)"

It's cool ! You should know that others have been working on
decentralization for a long time - already long before Facebook was
created
- to create the conditions for a more equitable and healthy society.
If
your awareness is real, you can probably help us. We lack
developers!

2) You also seem to have understood that your algorithms made people
crazy
by flooding them with sponsored posts and fake news. You say:
"strengthening our relationships improves our well-being and
happiness." So
you're going to modify some lines of code to reinforce what you call
our
"strong ties" that have a lot of "value" according to you. In the
end you
want "the time we all spend on Facebook is time well spent".

It's cool ! However, my dear Mark, you must understand that this
time is
even more precious than what you imagine.

For my part, let's say I spend(t) about an hour a day on Facebook
developing these strong ties and my own professional documentation.
Apart
from that, I also spend(t) some "recreational time". This point is
mentioned below*.

But as my strong ties and my documentation are irrecoverable by the
Facebook backup system as I explained to your college Yann LeCun**,
I must
note that Facebook stole them from me.

Let's see how much it costs ...

365 hours a year, that is round to 50 days. If I count my day price
at USD
1,000 (it's very reasonable, FB's lawyers are paid USD 1,000 per
hour),
that's USD 50,000 a year. Since I have been on Facebook for 7 years,
I will
send you a USD 350,000 bill

All the statistics indicate that I am an average user of Facebook in
terms
of duration of use. Hence we can multiply this cost by the number of
users
(not the current 2 billion but say 1 billion as an average number
during
the past seven years). Thus we obtain the figure of:

USD 350,000,000,000,000
Three hundred Fifty Thousand Billion Dollar

In conclusion, my dear Mark, you provide a true interoperability of
personal data that would allow people not to be hostages of Facebook
and
its centralization, or you repay all of them!

Yours

Olivier Auber
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #179 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 03:42

    
Re #177

"The world will continue to be mostly owned by about a hundred
people."

My personal fav... Our choice! to either work on Maggie's Farm or do
something worthwhile - while we still have the time.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #180 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 03:44

    
For those not aware, Facebook forced Mike to stop using R.U. Sirius
as his FB name... the campaign to overturn that decision was stopped
in its tracks by Mr. Z. so that FB would be a platform that truly
represents real people....immediately followed by fake accounts and
Russian disinformation campaigns - ON Facebook.

But it's okay, Mark apologized and it will all be better now.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #181 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 03:46

    
Bruce and Jon, and all of you who have actively participated, and
lurkers everywhere, thank you so much for stirring up the pot and
helping us focus our attention and endeavors, once again..

I cannot believe I have to wait another year for this....I feel so
alone :) NOT!!!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #182 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 04:13

    
#180 My bad!! Meant to say Ken, not Mike...was multi-tasking in my
head. At 70 years old that is a dumb thing to do as I now find
myself on the way to do something, can't remember what it was, and
have to go back to where ever I first had the thought in order to
remember it !! :)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #183 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:13

    
We're into the last day of the 2018 State of the World.

Paul Di Filippo just mentioned in a post elsewhere 10 of the 11
writers included in <bruces>' Mirrorshades anthology (an anthology
of cyberpunk writing published in 1986), ten are still actively
writing science fiction today.

We've been living science fiction for the last three decades... my
latest read in the genre was Cory Doctorow's novel "Walkaway," and
it felt contemporary... it could be about the tomorrow or the day
after. In fact, it may be happening as I type this... no doubt whole
communities of thought and action do exist outside the prevailing
culture and systems of power, invisible to the rest of us by design.
I could imagine the sort of people who used to read Coevolution
Quarterly with its coverage of emerging tech and lifestyles, people
who are exploring patterns of resilience and building adaptive
structures that will persist when the storms come.

People like Vinay Gupta:
https://www.vice.com/sv/article/qbxej5/global-resilience-guru

"Nobody will admit that we are apes with ape problems. Everybody is
carrying around the essentially colonialist fiction that we are in
some way more than the other animals, and once that error is made,
our heads fill with imaginary needs and imaginary stories. We can
pretty much perfect the happy ape level of consciousness in this
world, and all that it's going to cost us is our history of
over-complicating all of this with our pre-evolutionary mythology
about the nature of humanity."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #184 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:17

    
Well, we’re reaching closure now, and I’m very proud that we wasted
so little time this year trying to outguess or handicap The Donald. 
That was so constructive of us.  I feel proud.

I have now left Ibiza and I am back in Turin.   The air is filthier,
it’s colder and I’m better-dressed.  Onward!

I have learned that the British dance-music press likes to call
Ibiza “Beefa.”  The crowds that flock the discos in Ibiza are known
to them as the “Beefa Massive.”  This is as endearingly stupid as
popular commentary can get, in my opinion.   I will be calling Ibiza
“Beefa” from now on.

I have a feeling I’ll be spending more time in Beefa in 2018,
assuming that they don’t have a second Spanish Civil War, and that
Beefa doesn’t go broke because the Massive from Brexitania can no
longer show up to guzzle the sangria.  But why borrow that trouble,
ladies and gentleman?  Even a harmless Mediterranean dance island
has trouble enough!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #185 of 221: Shebar Windstone (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:18

    
Via email from Shebar Windstone:

About climate change...

For the last two SOTWs, I restrained myself from posting, fearing I
couldn't be succinct or clear enough, & hoped someone else would
step up to the virtual podium. Now, as yet another year's discussion
nears its end & the futures of living beings & the planet itself
seem to be nearing an end, too, I'll risk incoherence rather than
silence. Because "climate change" doesn't come near to describing
what we're up against. Nor does "global warming." *Global disaster*
& *the extinction of life as we've known it* -- or as we can imagine
it -- seem almost inevitable, & most of those who might have the
power to change things apparently prefer today's profits & power to
tomorrow's lives & planet.

Mitigating global disaster would necessitate mobilizing globally;
rethinking & reorganizing every aspect & element of our lives &
lifestyles, work, consumption & leisure; rationing & banning many
old products & inventing new ones; conscripting, volunteering &
reconfiguring forces of labor & production on a scale that would
dwarf all the efforts that ennabled (or necessitated) World War II.
As was true then, this isn't just a matter of what the rich &
powerful could do. In fact, it may be the opposite: It's about what
the poor, workers, consumers, managers, producers, members of
various communities (geographical, social, political, technological,
cultural, etc.) can do to protect ourselves from predatory
governments, corporations, armed forces, & all the other toxic &
deadly forces that are destroying the planet. Plastics, hormones,
pesticides, antibiotics, fertilizers, overconsumption, garbage, oil,
pollution, nuclear waste... ignorance, prejudice, superstition, fear
& terror... there is nothing we use to exploit, enslave, hurt or
kill others that does not boomerang back upon us. There is nothing
we do to exploit, tame, contain or destroy life on the planet that
does not constrain, cripple or destroy our own lives.

The means of invention, production, reproduction, distribution,
recycling & repurposing must be brought within the grasp & control
of all of us. And whatever cannot be recycled or repurposed should
be banned -- or, at least, carefully & thoughtfully controlled &
disposed of. Plastic bags, to-go containers & implements, wasteful
packaging, single-use anything - maybe even plastic anything --
should be made illegal & obsolete overnight! Private gas-powered
vehicles should go the way of the horse & buggy. Needless to say,
war & the weapons of armed conflct, whether domestic, international
or inter-species, should also be made illegal. What to do about
meat-eaters & exploiters of females of other species shouldn't even
be a question -- but as a consumer/exploiter of meat & dairy
products/producers, & as a friend & relative of farmers, I know it
will be! If I could afford to travel more often, I'd say more about
personal carbon footprints, but right now, I can only suggest that
every person & every product & its packaging should have their
carbon costs & their recycling/ repurposing/ disposal costs included
in our/their prices & taxes. This should be a no-brainer! (Why isn't
it???)

I used to think that corporations wouldn't support environmentally
safe measures & products until they could figure out how to profit
from them. But now I have to ask: Is there is any kind of profit
that does not extract flesh & blood from workers & consumers, vital
or crucial elements from the earth? If we could conceptualize
ourselves as living & working in one big co-op or one big union with
all living creatures & with the natural resources & forces of the
planet itself, how would we manifest our solidarity, our mutual
inter-dependence, our power, our love & respect for ourselves & all
others in the circles or cycles of the only lives that will ever be
possible for us?

Finally, what other suggestions could I be making, what other
questions should I/we be asking?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #186 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:18

    
We’re in for a rugged year ahead, and I think we should close by
admitting that frankly.   There are few people who annoy me more
than perverse, against-the-grain yea-sayers.  “Yes, it’s true that I
lost both my feet in that avalanche, but  now I can make new friends
selling all my used shoes on eBay!”  It’s true that every cloud has
some silver lining, but if it’s an F-5 funnel cloud, there’s
something irresponsible about telling people to go gawk at the shiny
part.

This too shall pass, clouds, linings, the works.  We suffer, but I
find consolation in artwork.  Not that artwork makes the State of
the World any better objectively, but, well, it’s consoling.  So
I’ll wrap things up by offering some tips about music.  After all,
I’ve been in Ibiza.  Music, why not.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #187 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:19

    

Okay, there’s music that I actually like, and then there’s music
that interests me.  There’s music I enjoy, and then there’s music
that feels more like cultural news to me.  

I used to enjoy many kinds of music, ‘cause it was groovy, and then
there was a fraction of painful music that I listened to, in a
self-conscious college-guy fashion, to expand my boundaries of
taste.

Nowadays there’s one kind of music I still actually like.  Duke
Ellington.  To tell the full truth, I like most of Duke Ellington,
while there’s some commercial medley stuff the Duke did late in life
that I recognize as rubbish because he also knew it was rubbish. 
But Duke Ellington is, like, my last island of naive, unfeigned
appreciation.  Unjaded.  Youthfully enthusiastic, even.

Then there’s digital music:  techno, house, disco, electro, trance,
dubstep, grime, trip-hop and drum-n-bass.  I listen to megatons of
this stuff.  I don’t know why, because I know I don’t much “like
it.”   Maybe because it’s so available.  

I don’t go to live shows, I don’t wear the clothing, I don’t need to
meet anybody at any club, club drugs bore me.  So I’m a rather
unlikely fan of this splintered super-genre of digital music.  

But I do study it.  A lot.  I’m thinking that probably I put up with
it because it *IS* so digital.  I’m an earnest devotee of many forms
of contemporary tech-art. So I can cheerfully put up with music that
has too much circuitry and software in it.  I even get it about
fade-ins, tracks, loops, builds, drops.  I recognize the
characteristic wub-wubs and shrieks of particular forms of hardware.
Not enough to ever desire to create any such music myself, but,
well, I don’t code, either.  Nevertheless, I’m sure that my 2018
will have a soundtrack of this kind.  Making coffee in the morning,
doing housework, that’s what will be playing.  Probably more than in
2017, and louder, and from more artists.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #188 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:20

    
I don’t even mind the musicians, which is a tough thing for a
novelist to admit.  Since “everything that happens to musicians will
eventually happen to everybody,” if you’re kind, supportive and
indulgent to musicians nowadays, it’s like some universal
philanthropy.  

I particularly enjoy giving musicians money.  Nobody wants me to do
that; all the majors, Google Apple Facebook Amazon Microsoft,
they’re hell-bent on destroying musicians and removing any practical
acts of support that I might offer them.

Musicians mostly have to survive by touring nowadays — they’re like
vaudeville guys before the invention of recorded music — or else
they merch out on high-profit-margin items likes shoes and soft
drinks.  Okay, I don’t drink those drinks, I don’t wear the shoes
and I don’t pay gate at their shows either.  Is six bucks on
Bandcamp gonna kill me?  Take the money, come on.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #189 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:21

    

I listen to musicians, although most musicians can’t talk much.  If
they could speak fluently then they wouldn’t need instruments. 

Digital musicians are a little better, though.  They’re less
enslaved by the dire need to spend years in Mom’s basement learning
blues guitar.   You can read an interview with the average techno
DJ/producer type, and even the bespectacled women among them will
shyly admit stuff like “Well, I was planning on getting my
biochemistry doctorate, but  then I started playing tracks for
friends from my parents’ colossal vinyl collection, and one thing
led to another so I quit my day-job at the genetics lab and now I’m
touring Australia.”   

I’ve even seen interviews with trance-music guys where they blithely
admit stuff like, “I enjoy making 5,000 people happy at parties, but
I kind of wish the music was more complicated.”  There’s something
endearing about that.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #190 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:22

    
One might take, for instance, “Billain,” my favorite practitioner of
jagged, extreme drum’n’bass “neurofunk.”  This guy is obviously a
genius, even though he’s from Sarajevo and somehow chose to stay,
live and work there.  I first listened to his music because I
literally couldn’t believe what was happening in the soundtrack. 
Now it’s fair to say that I’m his genuine fan.  

I know his biography, I’m aware of what he’s up to.  I play tons of
Billain around the house.  His work speaks directly to my Belgrade
sensibility, the “Boris Srebro” aspect of Bruce Sterling, a guy who
has a home in the Balkans.  

I wouldn’t recommend that everyone should listen to Billain, because
Sarajevo neurofunk can kill small animals even at moderate volume,
but his epically overblown cyberdystopia landscapes cheer me up. 
They’re good for my morale.  They brighten my day, somehow.  I buy
every track the guy puts out.

https://soundcloud.com/billain
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #191 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:23

    

*I know I’m going on about music a bit — it’s a rousing, anthemic
close, okay? — but if you’re getting impatient, then here, just look
at this video.  This is “Courtesy” and “Avalon Emerson,” two
millennial women DJs, at Sonar Festival. This is a modern
Californian and a European, going at it hammer and tongs, arm in
arm.  They are, in the parlance, “smashing it.”

*If you don’t like this hour-long set, well, this form of music is
not for you.  It’s not gonna get any better than this.  This is
top-end for 2017, this is state of the art.  

*I quite admire Avalon Emerson.  She’s a Silicon Valley coder geek
with an astral IQ and a real paying job who prefers to play music. 
Good for her.

*Courtesy is from Copenhagen, and it’s rather rare for well-behaved
and civilized Danish women to make a large crowd go insane. 
Especially when her facial expression rarely changes and all she
does is twitch knobs a little and sip from a water bottle.

https://youtu.be/G2Oh4r1bi4E
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #192 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:24

    

*It might well be argued: “Hey, if you say you like ‘techno music,’
why don’t you just listen to Sven Vath and Pete Tong?  Because it’s
just tracks and loops, ramps and drops, it’s all yard goods, it all
sounds exactly the same! Nobody from outside the scene could tell a
1992 track from a 2012 track!”

And, well, yeah.  That’s true.  It’s a little odd, but digital music
is scarcely progressive at all.  The hardware jostles around a lot,
the musicians and the “massive,” they’re remarkably conservative.  

You might opine that lately more women are showing up, and the women
musicians in techno electro house etc et-al are somewhat more
creative than the standard club DJs.  I have no problem with that
theory.  If you’ve got another Grimes in the disco closet, bring her
on.  I could handle an entire coven of Grimeses.  A dozen covens of
Grimeses wouldn’t hurt my feelings any.  Plenty of room on the
playlist.

So who will I be listening to in 2018, to get me through month after
month of inevitable shock, occasional disaster, and relentless
official inanity and vulgarity?  Well, if I was a real true-blue
techno guy, then I’d be digging in crates for “rarities.”  Because
that’s what they  always do. If you’re Nina Kraviz from Moscow, you
can slay just because of your global skills as a sonic archivist.

But personally, I’ll be listening to young DJs.  The ones who came
over the parapet recently, the contemporary crop of wannabes. 
Because they’re the ones who need the boost.  They might be
“better,” or new-and-improved, but I’m not sure that I even care if
they’re better musicians.  They’re certainly not in better times.  
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #193 of 221: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 15 Jan 18 07:24

    

Brian Eno says that great musicians are those who have a great
audience, and these creatives don’t have a great audience — they’ve
got social media trolls and a business that wants to liquidate them
and stream their life-blood by the liter.  But I’m with ‘em anyway. 
Maybe I can help in some small way; everyone shows up at New Years,
but the futurist shows up in February, when it’s just as cold but
there are no free drinks.  So what the heck.  Whatever happens to
them will happen to everybody.

Willow, Noncompliant, Archie Hamilton, Beatrice Dillon, Saoirse,
Gideon, La Fleur, Volvox, Dr. Rubinstein, DJ Lag, Lauren Lo Sung,
OR:LA, Rroxymore, Anastasia Kristensen, Courtesy, Byron the
Aquarius, Nabihah Iqbal, Josey Rebelle, Debonair, Bedouin, Avalon
Emerson, Jlin, Peggy Gou, Objekt, Call Super — and anybody they link
to.  Good luck with that!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #194 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 08:14

    
I dropped some of those musicians into a playlist:
https://play.google.com/music/playlist/AMaBXyliAjruocz76IkCsBewDwa4nOOmSC0ZHDb
Q3ZvvPFMEB7czQFD3FY9ATI9HZZ3_xX1q2dt3WwdrfNNYrzptIHIBaFpP2g%3D%3D
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #195 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 10:09

    
Perfect for SOTW 2018: 
"CES Was Full of Useless Robots and Machines That Don’t Work"
https://www.thedailybeast.com/ces-was-full-of-useless-robots-and-machines-that
-dont-work

Is this our future? Thinking about Bill Barker's tongue-in-cheek
logo parody, which said "In the future, everything will work."
https://i.pinimg.com/236x/60/05/be/6005be2dcfc64109edb4c65e6f9ea1a7--limited-e
dition-prints-the-future.jpg

Another aspect of the word "work": let's do less of it.
http://theweek.com/articles/747843/case-28hour-work-week

"Perverse as it may seem, longer hours have become a mark of
privilege in the U.S. labor force: The well-educated, the highly
paid, white workers, and male workers all log in the most. Why?
Because in an economy where increased overall productivity doesn't
result in increased wages or leisure time, working obscenely long
hours to rake in more money is the one surefire way to increase your
standard of living."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #196 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Mon 15 Jan 18 10:16

    
Unfortunate juxtaposition of those two simultaneous 7:18 posts -

-pleeeeeze, can we talk about climate catastrophe!

and

-here's my soundtrack to the hard years ahead


fiddling while rome burns
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #197 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 10:58

    
"... pleeeeeze, can we talk about climate catastrophe!"

National Resources Defense Council has a list of actions you can
take to stop global warming. "Healing the planet starts in your
garage, in your kitchen, and at your dining-room table."
https://www.nrdc.org/stories/how-you-can-stop-global-warming

How many of those actions are you taking in your own life?
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #198 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 15 Jan 18 11:33

    
Anthropogenic climate change isn't going to cause "*the extinction
of life as we've known it*". It's going to bring humans close to
extinction or worse, it's going to cause many species to disappear.
Life will go on.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #199 of 221: Ari Davidow (ari) Mon 15 Jan 18 11:56

    
Well, with humans gone, that would be "the extinction of life as
we've known it".
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #200 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 15 Jan 18 12:24

    
You can't step into the same river twice. We can focus on effects on
civilization rather than exaggerate the expected impact, which is
indeed horrific.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #201 of 221: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Mon 15 Jan 18 12:35

    
The natural environment, w/o any help from homo saps, has managed to
conjure up some truly amazing disasters in the past.  

The one we're working so hard to create will go into the list, but
probably not too close to the top.  The effects on our very complex
and delicate civilization will be rather dire.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #202 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 12:35

    
I like this year's EFF tshirt...Cute cat reading 1984 while its tail
covers a surveillance camera. The stricker "FIGHT DYSTOPIA" struck
me as a bit weird and negative, until this SOTW..

http://www.eff.org   consider donating and/or taking part if you
have any more bandwidth left. 

Heck of a finish guys and girls...Jon, thank you for the playlist!
:)
Now I shall continue to do my housework and spring, I live in
Phoenix, Spring cleaning.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #203 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 15 Jan 18 12:36

    
Re: climate....like it or not, Gaia will have the last word...we may
well want to start listening, stop talking and start doing.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #204 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Mon 15 Jan 18 14:37

    
>National Resources Defense Council has a list of actions you can
take to stop global warming. "Healing the planet starts in your
garage, in your kitchen, and at your dining-room table."
https://www.nrdc.org/stories/how-you-can-stop-global-warming

>How many of those actions are you taking in your own life?


Let's see, for me, 6 yes, 1 partial yes, 2 with the help of
government, 1 working on it, 1 learning about it, 1 no.


>Anthropogenic climate change isn't going to cause "*the extinction
of life as we've known it*". It's going to bring humans close to
extinction or worse, it's going to cause many species to disappear.
Life will go on.

Ultimately it doesn't depend on the heat, it depends on if the air
is still breathable. What I learned about climate this year was
getting the sense of how the cascade of events could take a path
toward various sorts of unbreathably different atmospheres and toxic
oceans.

Those individual actions have to become like the wheeling turns of a
flock of birds to have a chance of catching up in counterbalance and
inventiveness to the already locked in change coming to us from the
future effects of the carbon already there, triggering sink
overloads and runaway feedback amplifications.

And the image I'm going away with from this year's conversation is
the bumbling around individual ants, and their role in social
intelligence and how we think about artificial intelligence.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #205 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 15 Jan 18 16:09

    
"Nine Reasons to be Optimistic about Climate Change in 2018":
https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/3k5k8y/nine-reasons-to-be-optimistic-about-
climate-change-in-2018

"Why 2018 must be a pivotal year for climate action":
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/01/why-2018-must-be-a-pivotal-year-for-cli
mate-action/

"The World Economic Forum will release its Global Risk Report ahead
of the Annual Meeting in Davos at the end of January. The climate
remains high on the agenda for the fifth year running, with
recognition that we are reaching crisis point in many parts of the
world. Government, business and civil society leaders will meet at
the event to discuss the unintended but dire environmental
consequences of continuing to rely on old economic growth models and
assumptions about wealth creation that are hindering investment in
low-carbon and climate-smart solutions. More holistic thinking will
be encouraged to reduce emissions, build resilience and plan for a
structured transition to a low-carbon economy."

Meanwhile the Trump government is digging its head into the sand:
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/10/climate/climate-change-trump.html?_r=0

"Why are these federal agencies putting so much effort into ‘science
cleansing’ instead of using time and resources to fulfill agency
responsibilities, such as protecting the environment and advancing
energy security? Removing information regarding climate change from
federal websites does not affect the reality of climate change, but
may serve to obfuscate the subject and inject doubt regarding the
scientific consensus that climate change is happening and that it is
caused by human activity."
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #206 of 221: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 16 Jan 18 00:01

    
Thanks to Shebar for posting that.

I was surprised how many of those NRDC suggestions I can check, too.
I also think that those of us educated enough and with funds enough
to do these things are not going to be the sufficient solution. Of
course we (individuals) should do them. But we (societies) also have
to change a whole lot beyond individual purchase and remediation
choices.

(Despite the surreal juxtaposition, thanks for making up that
playlist.)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #207 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Tue 16 Jan 18 05:17

    
Yes, thanks for the playlist! I intended irony, not criticism.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #208 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 16 Jan 18 07:04

    
Yesterday was the official end date for this discussion, however it
is still open for posting for anyone interested in making additional
contributions. Thanks to my friend and SOTW colleague <bruces>, and
to all others who contributed here. Still hopeful about 2018!
Onward, as they say, through the fog.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #209 of 221: David DeMaris (demaris) Tue 16 Jan 18 10:52

    
I don't go out of my way seeking electronic music I didn't make, but
I think it was early last year when I heard this piece on the radio
and sat in the car outside the theater performance I was attending
waiting to hear who made it.  Katie Gately, from Los Angeles. I'm
her great audience. 

https://soundcloud.com/katiegately/sets/pivot-excerpt-from-fat-cat-uk
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #210 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 16 Jan 18 22:29

    
<demaris> That's pretty great. I found more of her stuff on Google
Music. Pivot is included in an album called Split Series #23.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #211 of 221: John Spears (banjojohn) Wed 17 Jan 18 17:31

    
I couldn't find the "1984" tee shirt on the EFF site. Direct link?

I have to self promote a little by including the link to my one
electronic banjo recording. It's from 2010, but the guy I recorded
it with seemed pretty cutting edge at the time: Wes Forehand being
the  person who introduced me to circuit bending.

<https://lawrenceforehand.bandcamp.com/track/jocelyn-street>

Send him a dollar: I'm sure it'll make his day!
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #212 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 18 Jan 18 14:57

    
It's the shirt with the cat reading 1984...you get it automatically
with a $25.00 donation
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #213 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 18 Jan 18 14:57

    
self-promote away John :)
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #214 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 21 Jan 18 10:16

    
If only this had been published earlier!

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/sponsors/zurich/the-global-risks--risks-trends-
interconnections-map-2018/?adv=6712&prx_t=Kl4DAAAAAAFEANA>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #215 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 22 Jan 18 04:48

    
Yes Charles, saw that this morning...should be an interesting track
to follow for the next few days.
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #216 of 221: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 22 Jan 18 20:06

    
Here's the full report from which the risks map comes.

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/sponsors/zurich/the-global-risks--risks-trends-
interconnections-map-2018/?adv=6712&prx_t=Kl4DAAAAAAFEANA>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #217 of 221: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 23 Jan 18 16:44

    
Thx for the pointer
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #218 of 221: Rip Van Winkle (keta) Wed 26 Dec 18 10:17

    
Looking forward to the 2019 edition coming any day now...
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #219 of 221: Alex Davie (icenine) Thu 27 Dec 18 05:21

    
moi aussi, <keta>
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #220 of 221: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 29 Dec 18 09:27

    
We launch January 2...
  

inkwell.vue.503 : State of the World 2018: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #221 of 221: (fom) Wed 2 Jan 19 11:54

    
yeah that's today
  

