inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #0 of 179: The WELL (jonl) Sun 3 Jan 16 06:43

    
In January 2000 Jon Lebkowsky interviewed Bruce Sterling here in
Inkwell about "The Viridian Future," and in 2001 about "The State of
the Future." 2002's discussion was called "State of the Whirled,"
followed in 2003 by a discussion inspired by Bruce's nonfiction
book, "Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years." In 2004, we had
the "Bruce Sterling State of the World Address," and thereafter we
called it the "State of the World" conversation.

Pundits abound, speaking with real or fabricated authority on a
variety of subjects, and as the year turns spewing top ten lists and
year-end summaries, and confident but subjective prognostications
about the next  year or five. If you're bored with that sort of
thing, you might find this two-week conversation more fun,
interesting, and compelling. Our speakers are not creating
keyword-rich listicles to maximize hits and produce conversions...
but discussing the "state of the world" based on their perspectives
as future-focused mavens immersed in information and contemporary
culture. 

Bruce Sterling's perspectives are especially interesting given his
global perspective as someone who travels and reports broadly, and
his experiences as an author, speaker, teacher and maker attentive
to trends in science, culture, politics, and design. He's known a
novelist, journalist and speaker. While acting as “Visionary in
Residence” at Art Center College of Design in 2008, he wrote
“Shaping Things,” one of the first books about the Internet of
Things. In 2008 he was the curator of the Share Festival in Turin,
on the theme of Italian digital manufacturing. He was one of the
original columnists for Make magazine and wrote the cover story for
the first issue of WIRED. Bruce Sterling lives in Turin, Belgrade
and Austin. http://casajasmina.arduino.cc/team/

Jon Lebkowsky has been making and sharing experiences in digital
culture and media for over 25 years. Currently he's part of Polycot
Associates, a mission-driven digital development co-operative based
in Austin, Texas. He's also President of EFF-Austin, an organization
that’s been supporting digital freedom in Texas since 1990. He's
been an activist, sometimes journalist, and blogger who writes about
the future of the Internet, digital culture, media, and society.
http://weblogsky.com
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #1 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 3 Jan 16 06:51

    
This Robert Anton Wilson quote seems relevant as a first post...

"The only 'realities' (plural) that we actually experience and can
talk meaningfully about are perceived realities, experienced
realities, existential realities -- realities involving ourselves as
editors -- and they are all relative to the observer, fluctuating,
evolving, capable of being magnified and enriched, moving from low
resolution to hi-fi, and do not fit together like the pieces of a
jig-saw into one single Reality with a capital R. Rather, they cast
illumination upon one another by contrast, like the paintings in a
large museum, or the different symphonic styles of Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, and Mahler.

"Alan Watts may have said it best of all: 'The universe is a giant
Rorschach ink-blot.' Science finds one meaning in it in the 18th
Century, another in the 19th, a third in the 20th; each artist finds
unique meanings on other levels of abstraction; and each man and
woman finds different meanings at different hours of the day,
depending on the internal and external environments."

http://www.rawilson.com/trigger1.html

There's also that Vladimir Bartol quote, "Nothing is an absolute
reality, all is permitted" - which was boiled down via William
Burroughs and "Assassin's Creed" to this: "Nothing is true,
everything is permitted." 

But everything you'll read here is Absolutely True...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #2 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:01

    
*It's pleasant to be back on the WELL, an institution of
unfathomable age in Internet years.

*Let's cozy on up with the shiny new brandy decanter (in the shape
of a frosted light bulb, commemorating Nikola Tesla),  bravely open 
the window onto the planet's crazy weather, and surmise on what
gives for this year!
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #3 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:09

    
Every year on the WELL I decry the climate crisis.  It's always
worse, and I always know it's gonna get worse, and it infallibly
does.  In 2015 the weather was exceptionally sinister.   It's
getting worse faster.

 Already this year, Britain's drowning, the US Midwest is drowning,
the North Pole thawed out in December, and New York City didn't
freeze in December at all, an unheard-of development that ought to
scare even Wall Street.   California has lost millions of fine old
trees to the drought; these organic monuments won't be coming back
within a human lifetime. The Anthropocene has scarred the
Californian landscape.

An international climate agreement showed up during 2015, because
anyone who thinks they can run a country in these conditions should
properly be gravely alarmed.  However, since the Westphalian
nation-state system was itself a major cause of global warming
("Never mind my national exhaust pipes, I'll make money with them
while they empty over there in your 'globe'"), the political
agreement can't make much difference. It buoys the self-esteem of
the political class and its commentariat without actually cleaning
the sky of two centuries of accumulated poisons.  

Despite the accelerating mayhem, nobody will have any particular
change-of-heart on the subject this year.   Those of us who know
about it have known as long as the oil companies did -- since the
early 1970s. Those  who cashed in by denying climate change will be
drowning and parching just like the rest of us, but they're never
gonna admit their culpability; they'll just shrug and cite
Scripture.  They've done something truly awful, but even if these
dismal malefactors were all promptly hanged Nuremberg style, in a
show-trial haze of worldwide  moral condemnation, it wouldn't change
the course of events much.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #4 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:10

    
The 2030s are swimming into view: it will be a decade of sudden,
regional calamities and mass migrations.  The poor will of course
suffer more (they always do), but the rich will fear it more.  
Nations will build national walls (many nations are doing ithatnow
-- it's the new vogue, even kindly Brazil likes to do it) but
national walls can't, and don't address, a global problem that is
made of wind and air.   

These physical barriers will suffer the "Fukushima effect:"  the
dikes you built to resist the tsunami only hold those catastrophic
waters in, once the almighty wave comes over the top.  Also, the
industrial complex you are trying to protect from natural disaster
becomes the source of a secondary, artificial disaster.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #5 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:15

    

"Globalization" is over for 2016.   We have entered an era of
Internet Counter-Revolution.  The events of 1989 feel almost as
distant as those of 1789.  The globalizing, flat-world,
small-pieces-loosely-joined Internet is behind us, it's history. 
The elite geek Internet could not resist those repeated tsunamis of
incoming users.

It turned out that normal people like the "social" in social media a
lot better than they ever liked the raw potential of media
technology.  In Russia and China in 2016, digital media is an arm of
the state.  Internet has zero revolutionary potential within those
societies, but all kinds of potential for exported cyberwar.   The
Chinese police spy and firewall model, much scoffed at in the 1990s,
is now the dominant paradigm.  The Chinese have prospered with their
authoritarian approach, while those who bought into borderless
friction-free data have been immiserated by the ultra-rich.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #6 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:15

    <scribbled by jonl Wed 6 Jan 16 18:03>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #7 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:18

    

In the USA it's an older American story: the apparent freedom of
Henry Ford's personal flivver has briskly yielded to the new Detroit
Big Five of Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon, and, in last place,
Microsoft.

In 2016, everything that looks like digital innovation, "big data,"
"the cloud," the "Internet of Things," are actually promotional
slogans that play into the hands of the GAFAM "Big Five."  Anybody
who lacks broadband and a mobile OS is in deadly peril, especially
the digital old-school likes of IBM, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, Oracle…
and the hapless TV networks, whose median viewer age is now in the
60s.

The GAFAM Big Five, the "Stacks," will turn their wrath on the
victims closest to them, well before they complete their lunge for
control of cars and thermostats.  However, their destiny is obvious.
The rebels of the 1990s are America's new mega-conglomerates. 
Google is "Alphabet," Apple pruned the "computer" from its name,
Amazon is the Washington Post. In 2016, that's how it is, and in
2017, 189, 19, much more so.

So the not-evil guys are the new evil guys, but don't be scared by
this.  It's quite like watching the 1960s Space Age crumble from
giant-leaps-for-mankind to launching low-orbit gizmos for profit. 
It's comprehensible, it can be dealt with.   Sure, it's tragic if
your head was in the noosphere, but if you have any historical
awareness of previous industrial revolutions, this is really easy to
understand.  It's already in your pocket and purse, it's written on
every screen you look at  It could scarcely be more obvious.

Yes, Internet Counterrevolution is  coming, much of it is here
already, and it's properly considered a big deal, but it's not
permanent.  This too shall pass.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #8 of 179: jonl as a user (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:38

    
User jonl reporting for (shared) duty, with this quote from a
Rhizome interview with Tung-Hui Hu
(http://rhizome.org/editorial/2015/dec/16/interview-tung-hui-hu/): 


"The user is a deeply synthetic creation, right? The identity of the
user is actually very odd if you look at it historically, because it
really means a way of dividing up a shared resource. You’re all
sharing the same computer and yet you think of this as private. The
journalist Steven Levy says, 'it’s actually like making love to
someone knowing that they’re making love to many other people.' How
we think of this now as a model for individuality is very
bizarre—perhaps a matter of forty years of indoctrination. Every
user has become a freelance laborer, every user is out for
themselves, everyone can affiliate themselves with whatever company.

"This sounds great in theory, but the very end of the book takes up
this idea of the 'human as a service'—a technologist’s phrase, not
mine. It means that we should all 'Uberize' ourselves—not just to
drive cars, but to let every moment of our day be monetized by an
app. The gruesome literalization of the 'human as a service' is the
captcha workers who are asked to prove that they’re human over and
over again, every ten seconds. If all we need is to get proof of
humanity, then we can make that a service and we can outsource it to
Bangladesh and have that done for us for two dollars per thousand
captchas. It’s confusion between what is really an economic idea of
accounting for how much time we are using, which is called the user,
and the idea of the personal."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #9 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 16 05:56

    
I had a dream...

Sheriff Andy is dead, Mayberry's been bulldozed and replaced with
mixed use developments, condos rising high into the carbon-saturated
air, hopefully not too fragile to resist the increasingly turbulent
"weather events" driven by climate change. The sheriff's posse is
still there, gathering petitions and electing officials, stubbornly
resisting the obvious transformations and the science behind them,
even burning the texts. Clever politicians, seeing an angry mob
forming in the streets, soapbox emotional rhetoric, accumulate votes
and power, ultimately cycling money and resources into their own
coffers, hoping to build future-proofed bunkers...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #10 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 16 15:27

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 5 Jan 16 03:35>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #11 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 16 05:37

    
Internet Counterevolution doesn't mean a return to the status quo
ante of the world before the Internet.  Globalization goes on, it
just loses its glamour; where there was spreading prosperity there
is offshored exploitation, where there was free-moving discussion
there are cyberwar trolls, where there was your happy face in a
Facebook there's in instant police dossier that you foolishly built
yourself, where nobody knew you were a dog you are now
branded-and-sorted Stack livestock, and so on.  

Twenty-teens globalization looks less like jet-set free-spending
yuppie tourism and more like hordes of illegal Syrians arriving via
Facebook support groups.  The wanderers are mostly Moslems, because
the effect of the digital "Arab Spring" on their somnolent societies
was catastrophic.  It's amazing how badly that harmed them, and they
show no sign of getting over it; on the contrary. But refugee life
is for anybody, now.  Rich or poor, they can all be fleeing, at a
moment's notice, if they get a sudden deluge of Greenhouse rain. 
People everywhere are afraid of immigrants now because they see
their own face in that mirror.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #12 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 16 05:41

    

I had a chat at a New Years Party here in Belgrade with a young
female stranger.  Naturally she wanted to know what an American was
doing in town, and I said, as I often do, that Serbian society has
pioneered a lot of situations that spread elsewhere.  Today's
religious wars, economic sanctions, breaking of economic sanctions,
financial collapse, ultra rich moguls robbing the middle class,
major air powers blowing the daylights out of an unfriendly regime
with allegedly precise bombs:  daily life in Serbia 1999 is
something most everybody understands now.  It's the "Globalization
of Balkanization."

But weren't there any POSITIVE aspects of Serbian cultural exports?
she demanded.  That question caught me flat-footed, because as a
futurist I just don't do "positive" and "negative".  I actively
avoid that kind of value judgment.  Wishful thinking and fearful
thinking gets in the way of an objective understanding of
change-drivers.   Change occurs from pent-up energies: it's like
asking if a battery's voltage is "good" or "bad."  All potential
change has positive or negative potential: otherwise it isn't even
"potential."

But I had to spare my Serbian interlocutor that blandly amoral
lecture; because it was one in the morning of Jan 1 02016, and we'd
been drinking.  So I had to flatter her, and quickly invent some
"positive" aspects of the ongoing Serbian cultural imperialism.  

Thinking fast, I told her that Serbs excel at prospering in other
people's countries.   Although Serbia the country has a rough
reputation, the Serbian emigre communities in dozens of other
countries cause scarcely any trouble.  They prosper, in fact.  

Also: given that they're a small, thorny country, Serbia does
remarkably well at kissing up to major powers when those powers
themselves get thorny.   The Serbs actually thrive during cold wars.
They know how to cleverly exploit other people's stupid clashes for
their own benefit.   

And, lastly, Serbs are also exceedingly good at dealing with
disasters.  They complain incessantly in normal daily life, but when
ever life gets genuinely hazardous, they scarcely beef at all. 
Everybody diligently stacks the sandbags,  and nobody wrings their
hands or slacks off.  That's a difficult virtue to acquire, but it
is indeed a virtue.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #13 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 16 07:52

    
Speaking of Internet globalization...

A few years ago, Charles Wyble of the Free Network Foundation
envisioned a fleet of balloons carrying broadband access points,
blanketing formerly under- or un-served realms with gigabit
connectivity. Great idea, I thought, but what would it take to pull
it off?

One of the stacks could do it, and Google was up to the inspiration,
and in 2013 filed a patent that was a first step on the path to
Project Loon: https://www.google.com/loon/  

"Many of us think of the Internet as a global community. But
two-thirds of the world’s population does not yet have Internet
access. Project Loon is a network of balloons traveling on the edge
of space, designed to connect people in rural and remote areas, help
fill coverage gaps, and bring people back online after disasters."

"Project Loon balloons float in the stratosphere, twice as high as
airplanes and the weather. In the stratosphere, there are many
layers of wind, and each layer of wind varies in direction and
speed. Loon balloons go where they’re needed by rising or descending
into a layer of wind blowing in the desired direction of travel. By
partnering with Telecommunications companies to share cellular
spectrum we’ve enabled people to connect to the balloon network
directly from their phones and other LTE-enabled devices. The signal
is then passed across the balloon network and back down to the
global Internet on Earth."

I can remember when, in Austin, it was a big deal to get the local
coffee shops to add wifi, via our "Austin Wireless City" project:
http://www.austinchronicle.com/screens/2004-06-11/215435/

I'm quoted in that article, saying "We're at a turning point now,
and it's one we predicted, where right now free Wi-Fi has moved from
being a value that you could add on to your business to being a
necessity that you have to offer in order to remain competitive. Any
kind of venue where you want people to hang out now needs to have
free Wi-Fi. It's just that simple and it's just that important."

That seems quaint.

Today access to the Internet is spreading far and wide, along with
relatively low cost mobile devices accessing cellular and/or wifi
services that are increasingly fast and furious. The connectivity
has accelerated beyond our comprehension of its implications. 

Interesting logistics: how many devices, endpoints, destinations,
networks can you add before the scaling issues overwhelm the
systems? I'm surprised daily that the thing just works, that it's
unusual to lose access to even the most obscure points on the
Internet map.

This is background to our conversation of the next couple of weeks,
for sure...


 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #14 of 179: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 16 07:56

    
(This asynchronous conversation will continue for two weeks, so
check back every day or two if you find it interesting.)

(Only members of the WELL can post directly to the conversation, but
others can send questions or comments to inkwell at well.com, and
our hosts can post them here.)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #15 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 08:05

    
GOPOD, I've missed this ...rational conversation at last...sail on
boys, while I gather my thoughts. This day has been all too much at
once. You be peace, I'll be quiet (What About Bob)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #16 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 16 09:55

    
Adding the public short link for sharing this discussion:
http://tinyurl.com/SOTW2016
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #17 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 10:13

    
 Slippage,

Ok, I'll try one...I'm thinking that the only real question about
the impact of climate change and what we can institute now, is
whether or not we will be living above or below ground by 2050?
Thoughts on that guys? Any optimists left among us?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #18 of 179: bill braasch (bbraasch) Tue 5 Jan 16 10:15

    
Facebook's Free Basic service was shut down in Egypt and India.  This cloud
thing is controversial because 1) it usurps the powers that be?  or 2) it
data mines the serfs?  or 3) both? or 4) neither?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #19 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 10:46

    
Re: #1 nearly choked on my coffee Jon. After those beautiful quotes:
<But everything you'll read here is Absolutely True>

Shameful self promotion, but I just blogged on perceptions and
realities
a few days ago
(http://tcnewcomb.com/2015/12/31/reality-reality-reality/

So, what's going on in your noosphere re: climate change and the
Stacks?
Can you speak to Bruce's spot-on summation of where we're at? What
are some possible bright futures?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #20 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 10:59

    
carefully worded that last sentence after reading Bruce's comment in
<12>:

"I just don't do "positive" and "negative".  I actively
avoid that kind of value judgment.  Wishful thinking and fearful
thinking gets in the way of an objective understanding of
change-drivers."

That is going to be posted on my monitor Bruce, right next to
Margaret Mead's "Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful,
committed citizens can change the world; indeed, it's the only thing
that ever has"

Thanks for capturing that trap so well. 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #21 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 11:54

    <scribbled by tcn Tue 5 Jan 16 13:16>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #22 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 12:31

    <scribbled by tcn Tue 5 Jan 16 12:31>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #23 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 13:13

    <scribbled by tcn Tue 5 Jan 16 13:13>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #24 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 13:14

    
Sorry for the scribbles, algorithmically handicapped
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #25 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 16 14:50

    
Ted asked me to weigh in on climate change and the stacks.

Oddly, there are still climate skeptics, and they're entrenched. But
they don't know anything, and the best minds ignore them now and
struggle with the very real issues of mitigation, and more likely
adaptation, and the impact fragile economies and complex global
logistics. We haven't done enough because it's so hard to do what we
really should about what we can control. 

Someone on Facebook argued that, because climate changed before
humans could have an impact, that climate change must not be
anthropogenic. Weird logic, there. "Fire existed before humans
walked the earth, therefore humans don't set fires." 

The issue's politicized and part of the arsenal of gut-level appeals
that stir the mob into a voting frenzy. 

Personally, I think we've already made the catastrophe; at this
point it's just a matter of time. However we humans have a way of
thinking our way out of wicked dilemmas, so there's always hope.
More so, if we can save science from the Republican party, and save
the Republican party from its dangerous slide into darkness. But
that's another subject for another day.

Re the stacks, I'm wanting to read Robin Chase's book, "Peers Inc,"
about an emerging collaborative economy leveraging Internet
platforms including those spinning out of "the stacks." I'm also
interested in recent conversations about "platform co-operativism,"
where you would have platform-based commercial entities (think Uber,
Lyft, AirBnb) that are organized as co-operatives. Having recently
turned my own company into a worker-owned co-op, I'm looking to help
others that want to take the same path toward a more just, fair, and
democratic workplace. Maybe "democratic" isn't the best word, it's a
loaded term. Maybe "participatory." (I find myself thinking and
arguing that "democracy" describes a system that can't work, but I'm
attentive to the Churchill comment... "is the worst form of
government, except for all the others.")

A lot of power concentrated in those "stacks," let's be glad they're
benign, and hope they remain so.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #26 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 15:31

    
Yes, I like participatory much better Jon. Lots going on there along
with Blockchaining and Fintech..Have you heard about e-residency?

https://e-estonia.com/e-residents/about/

An opportunity to become a digital citizen of the world...and you
can locate your business(es) there and use blockchaining. I'm
seriously considering it.

Bruce and Jon, thoughts about that as one more affordance to
collaborative economies?

Agree it's nice the stacks are playing nice, but they will soon
start eating each other. It's bad tech to wall yourself off. I get
the short range greed factor. But long-range, it seems a losing
strategy to me.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #27 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 5 Jan 16 15:38

    
Administrivia for those of you following from outside WELL...

We try and keep our posts short and on point...if they go more than
6 paragraphs or so, or if we go off on a rant, we "hide" it, so
others can quickly read along and stay with the flow of the
conversation. You can click on the hidden response to see what was
written, or read to the end of the topic and go back to read the
lengthier posts. YMMV

'Slippage' means that someone else posted a question or response
before yours was posted. It let's people know why the placement of
your post may not seem to be in the flow of the conversation.

'Scribble' means there was an error or for some reason the writer
decided to delete the post.

Now back to our regular programming.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #28 of 179: (fom) Tue 5 Jan 16 16:52

    
So about climate change. I find it disconcerting that in the past few 
years, people who are skeptical of the anthropogenic part get lumped in 
with those who don't believe it's happening at all. There used to be a 
distinction. To me it is a significant distinction and shouldn't be 
abandoned.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #29 of 179: david gault (dgault) Tue 5 Jan 16 20:23

    
thanks Bruce and Jon.  I needed some poetry.  Reading this
leads me to wonder who or what will be known as great artists
in 2050 or 2100?  An unanswerable question but fun to think about.
I'm writing a 5 year technology plan for a small Community College
at the moment.  I'm having trouble with it.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #30 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 6 Jan 16 00:09

    
http://www.techfugees.com/

Bruce you are closer to this than the rest of us...the refugee
problem is not just Syrian, but almost a world-wide diaspora. Are
you aware of this site? Thoughts?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #31 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:02

    
<fom>: One obvious effect of the anthropocene: an extinction event
driven by willful ignorance. From that perspective, the nuances just
don't seem that important.

In other words... from the mitigation perspective, if you believe
it's critical (to the survival of the species) to create policies to
address and limit emissions globally, the distinction between the
two forms of denial is moot. Both oppose taking effective action to
constrain emissions and mitigate the catastrophe that climate
scientists are expecting. And for some the debate is not really
about whether the climate is or isn't changing, but about the
economic impact of mitigation. "I don't want to think about the
future, I don't want to think that this is happening, because I
don't want to change the way I do business, and I don't want
expensive profit-killing regulations - if science says otherwise,
science must be wrong ..."

<dgault>: Here's are related links to Juxtapoz
http://www.juxtapoz.com/news/technology/start-ing-something-new/ and
Apple https://www.apple.com/start-something-new/. Apple's "Start
Something New" highlights artists using new (Apple) tools to make
art. There's a live event tomorrow at an Apple Store in NYC. That
doesn't exactly answer your question, but strikes me as relevant.

I've always been interested in the possibility space the Internet
has inspired, for collaborative network art. One of the early (as in
early 90s) network art projects was SITO: https://www.sito.org/ I've
wondered if we won't see a resurgence of that collaborative
spirit...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #32 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:03

    
In these annual State of World events I like to take the planet's
moral temperature;  kind of a general health-check for our world's
many regions and peoples.  

So, who among us can say that 2015 was a good time for them?  That
their position is improved, their footing is more solid, opportunity
beckons, they have  reasons to hop out of bed in the morning -- all
that fine stuff?

Well, not a lot of us.  But some.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #33 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:04

    
1. China

China made a lot of money in a time when there's not much around. 
Most people who make any money now have it swiftly mopped up by
ultra-rich moguls, but China threw an anticorruption campaign in
2015 that scared the local malefactors.

When it comes to cyberwar and cybersovereignty issues, China is just
plain winning.  They have stolen just fantastic amounts of adversary
data, including every dossier of any American federal official with
a security clearance.  I've never even heard of such of
comprehensive feat of espionage.  To use the American's own federal
security system to wreck their security was worthy of Shaolin
kungfu.

"Cybersovereignty is basically just raw nationalism at work, but
China's shown that they can not only get away with raw digital
nationalism, but persuade other powers to throw in with them. 
Russia is their client state in this regard.  There's not a regime
in the world now that doesn't secretly hanker to do it China's way,
and that definitely includes the US.

The South China Sea thing obviously means a lot to China.  It's
weird that a huge groaning land empire would invent a new way to
steal more of the planet's surface, but they did.  Their naked
aggression has lost them a lot of soft power and  aroused deep and
lasting regional resentments from Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, 
whomever, but obviously China thinks it's worth the cost.  

Nobody chased them off and took their wild-eyed ocean claims back
from China, and they seem to be limbering up the drilling rigs while
they terraform unsinkable aircraft carriers from dying coral reefs. 
I'm thinking they sternly mark this as a major positive achievement.

China has a big Moslem problem, like  every other major power, but
they're able to repress their Moslems more quietly than everybody
else thanks to their media control.  So they don't suffer as much
from this endemic crisis of the 21st century.

Superpower rivals the USA and Russian Federation are bogged down in
multiple, unwinnable, land/drone expeditions that cost political
capital, never end, and convey no geostrategic benefit.  China is
free of that in 2016.  So they're one of the few big global players
who can march forth without carrying an anvil; they've got freer
hands.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #34 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:04

    
2.  India

India could claim that 2015 was a pretty good year.  There were  no
major scandals afflicted the slightly weird Modi government; a guy
who came to power with the gore of a Moslem pogrom on his hands, but
nowadays no one will fuss.  The Indian population is in a relatively
stable mood; no massive calamities, the Maoists are on the back
burner; Indian public life is so calm that even feminist issues are
getting a public hearing.   This is very contemporary of them,
considering that, in every polity around India, women are crushed
without a second thought.

India's victory condition for 2016 is to just keep growing and
slowly rolling forward while everybody around them withers or hides
in a ditch.   India wins by the widening comparative advantage. 
Indians don't have much say in world matters -- everybody cordially
ignores them their suggestions -- but it doesn't matter if India
says "yes" or "no" to any global issue.  No matter what they
proclaim from their high-minded pundit pulpit, they never actually
do much of anything on the world stage, so that's cool.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #35 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:04

    
3. Italy, Spain, Portugal

*2015 was rough for Europe's troubled southern rim, but there was
more daylight in it than in the truly stormy years of '12, '13, '14.
These afflicted states don't have to play the wounded cripples of
Europe in 2016, because Europe's crippled all over.  

*Spain elected a less austere government.  From sleepy Portugal no
news is good news. Italy's still pretty far from prospering, but it
wasn't in free-fall in 2015.

*In Torino, where I spend a lot of my time, the city government is
more or less broke, but the city is just awash in lively
culture-event tourism.  There are lines outside museums that stretch
around the block, and the prosecco flows like water.  I don't get
it.  Maybe the Turinese are too hospitable, and not scalping the
foreigners with enough severity.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #36 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:05

    
4. Iran (sort of)

Iran enjoyed a diplomatic breakthrough in 2015 and looked like it
was going to re-join the world.  Then, late in the year, it got
swept into a Shiite proxy war with Saudi Arabia.  Iran is always
troubled, but it must please them to see their neighbors more
obsessed with bloody-handed martyr cults than Iran ever was.  In
2016 they're a world player, as opposed to the basket-cases of Iraq,
Syria, Afghanistan and other neighbors.

5.  Myanmar/Burma and Vietnam had a good 2015.  You can say they had
nowhere to go but up, but hey, they really went up.

6.  For last but best, Canada is looking quite a lot perkier.  They
got rid of a cynical, foul-tempered national leader and voted in a
shiny young family dynast.  Dynasts are pretty bad news for
democracies, frankly, but at least dynasts tend to arrive with
pre-packaged court retainers who know where to find the pork.  

It's been unnerving to observe Canadian politics, normally the
boring-est in all the G-7, and realize that the Canadians were
gabblingly out of control, cocaine-soaked weirdos like former mayor
of Toronto.  For 2016, its reasonable to think that they might
return to their usual world status of well-behaved good-example.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #37 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:06

    

Then there were all the various guys who made 2015 infamous, and boy
were there ever a lot of them. What a mess it was.

1. Syria.  Horrible. Just an amazingly bad regional scene with grim
world implications: much worse than the Balkans in the 1990s. Not
one faction there to cheer for.   No ray of light anywhere. 
Everybody hates and despises the Syrians, everybody is blowing them
up on the ground and walling them off wherever they run.  Worse yet,
they bitterly hate themselves and blow themselves up.   They're the
Quasimodo of the Arab Spring, the free-fire range for anybody who
wants some target practice with roadside mega-bombs and aerial
killer robots.

ISIS is just amazingly wicked, a struttingly evil theocratic terror
group that is morally viler than organized crime.  They make bin
Laden look like a quiet country gentleman.  It's like they're
deliberately stretching acts of public evil as an Overton Window. 
If you're ISIS, where is the end game for this dismal arc of
war-crime?  Genocide followed by a Masada-style suicide cult in
their last bunker, presumably.

3.  Turkey, so close to a European destiny,  caught Syria's
authoritarian disease.  After 2015, Turkey is very badly off,
bewildered, beset with hazards.  I blame Erdogan: he betrayed
Turkish democracy.  He turned his horse into a crocodile just so he
could keep riding.  Ataturk would have jailed or shot this guy. 
He's disastrous.

Turkey shot down a Russian aircraft in 2015.  This proxy hot-war in
the skies over Syria is like the drone-chickens of the 1990s coming
home to roost.  It's swell to bug-splat the rebel tribesmen with
your invulnerable drones, but now the sky's so thick with fighter
aircraft that they're shooting each other.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #38 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:07

    
(ISIS counts as a not quite #2 region/ nation-state for those
keeping count up there *8-/)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #39 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:08

    

4. Iraq remains a catastrophic mess.  Since they're so visibly keen
on sectarian ethnic-cleansing, they ought to abandon the shell of
the national order and form balkanized mini-states.  It makes sense,
but I don't think even that would help them.

5. Saudi Arabia is indiscriminately killing Shiites and
scimitar-rattling at Iran.  Cheap tracking has wrecked their OPEC
advantage.  They had a dreadful 2015 and 2016 looks darker for them
in every way.

7.  The Emirates and Dubai are under the curse of cheap oil and  the
abject political failure of their Arab Spring projects.  These
little entities were throwing their weight around like giants five
years ago. Now they must want to hide in a black tent with a
sheepskin over their head.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #40 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:10

    
8.  The Islamic religion may have been the biggest loser of 2015. 
If you are Moslem, then people hate and fear you in every corner of
the planet, especially within the Moslem Umma.  Islamophobia is
winning across the board.   It's a sure vote-getter anywhere on
Earth, even in Islamic states (as long as it's the wrong kind of
Islam you're voting against, and there is no right kind of Islam
anywhere for anybody).

After 9/11, there was a broad assumption that the sane majority of
Muslims would soon mellow out the tiny fraction of deadly, crazy
ones, but that's not true.  It's like thinking that sane majority
guys in the Austro-Hungarian Empire were too bourgeois and placid to
start World War One.  

Terror thrives in the shadow of the Minaret; Moslems are killing
each other in 2016 with the kamikaze gusto of American gun-nuts. 
They constantly play the persecuted-minority card when anyone
decries that behavior, and indeed they are a persecuted minority,
but God help you if you are smaller minority in their merciless
grip: a Yezidi, a Druze, a Kurd, a Jew, they'll kill you as soon as
look at you.   Islam is going into a ghost-dance spiral of decline;
it's quite hard for unbelievers not to share the factions' violent
hatred for one another.

Even the Moslem diasporas are in peril, and those diasporas are
getting bigger every day as Moslems scatter in well-deserved,
bone-deep fear of other Moslems.  If this were the 19th century,
they'd simply be wasting away with epidemics and famine.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #41 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:11

    
*I deleted number 6, Venezuela, because the less said about their
utterly dismal situation, the better.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #42 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:12

    
9. One think that Israel would be thriving by the utter breakdown of
their sworn enemies all around them. Unfortunately, Israel's regime
is so incompetent and paranoid that everybody hates them.  Israel
has no sincere  friends left on Earth, except for the nutcase-fundie
wing of the US Right wing, and even they know they're being played.

Israel is a developed society with exceedingly talented people, but
they can't assert any order at all in their region.  They huddle
behind the high walls while gangs throw garbage-cans full of
explosives on them.   Security walls are one of the few big Israeli
cultural exports.  


10.  It was trendy to talk about the "BRICs" or "BRICSA" a few years
ago: "Brazil Russia India China South Africa."   They so share some
geostrategic interests, but they balkanized under Internet
Counterrevolution.  They can't find any common ground.

South Africa is broke and economically incompetent.
Brazil is the same, a shocking mess; it's the same old back-broken
Brazil, only with Lula's hapless secretary wondering where her charm
went.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #43 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:12

    
11. Russia is so lastingly humiliated by their failure to globalize
that they've become a "troll state."   To have a fellow Slavic
people take to the streets in Euromaidan really hurt their national
pride; it was like a traumatic divorce.  I get it why Putin is
popular in Russia; he's deftly acting-out their dog-in-the-manger
attitude for them.  Granted, Russians have got a lot to be resentful
about from the way the world has treated them; if the world wants to
place them under economic sanctions, why should they ever play nice
about globalization any more?  There was never much in that game for
them, except for one of the worst cases of mogul oligarchy ever seen
anywhere.

In 2015 the Russians  saw themselves as kicking ass and taking
names.  However, they're broke from the oil thing, and the long-term
consequences of Crimea and Novorussia will be lastingly burdensome
and embarrassing.  Especially if you are actually love in Crimea and
Novorussia, and you trustingly imagined that Mother Russia is the
soul of kindness.

I'm quite the Russophile, actually.  I  genuinely sympathize.  I
listen with care to all their laments, and have learned a lot from
them.  I listen to Russian thinkers even Russians can't stand, like,
say, Alexander Dugin.  They're  the Other White Guy Continental
Superpower.  In two major world wars Russia was allied to the USA
and extremely valuable, even critical to victory.   So it's a shame
to see a second Cold War setting in for 2016, but, well, it will be
cold.  Russians and Americans almost never actually shoot each
other.  It's not exactly a love-hate relationship, but it's a deep
relationship; something like estranged stepbrothers.

I do wonder what happens when Putin falls off his stallion.  He's
working the ol' personality cult, and as a Russian leader he's been
very gifted and also lucky.  But in 2016, Putin's getting older and
he's not made of bronze.  He's just a weird Petersburg spook hustler
with a taste for judo and female gymnasts. 

What do the Russians do after Putin?  Is there any kind of unifying
vision for them?  Do they have any idea what they want from
themselves and the world?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #44 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:15

    

12. Great Britain is becoming Little Britain. The UK is like a giant
Cayman Islands in 2016.  They used to be the wise and perfidious
grownups in the geostrategic room, but now it's all about squalid,
petty things like Brexit, Scottish secession, anti-immigration;
British political extremes are thriving and the middle is dead as
mutton.  They've lost their soft-power by the bucketful; people who
used to beg for their wise counsel now ignore them.  What do they
want -- to be Airstrip One for any creep with a trailer-truck full
of cash? I've never seen them think so small.

13. Japan in 2016 is simply sad.  The Boom Japan of the 1980s was
such a vivid, impressive society.  It sounds a little odd to say
this, but the thing I really miss about Japan was their
inventiveness.  They used to do such profound, subversive stuff;
transistor radios, portable phones, miniature anything, giant neon,
freaky robots, even velcro shoes.  In 2016 they're the Electronic
Galapagos.  I can't remember the last time the Japanese made or
exported anything that set the world on its ear, and that used to
seem so effortless for them.  

What is wrong with them? Is it their  aging demographics?  If so,
then we're in for the fate they pioneered, because we're all gonna
be like that in a couple of  decades.

14. Greece is crippled and forgotten by its angry creditors. That's
plenty bad, and worse when you deserve it.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #45 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:15

    
15. Germany, just marking time and holding on, hoping for a change
in the political weather. They'll get one, but it might be a turn
for the worse,

16.  France, petrified with GWOT terror after some zealots wasted a
crowd of rock and roll fans -- not exactly a hard target.  That
massacre instantly played into the hands of the French Right, who
are they most-advanced-yet-electable version of everybody else's
European nationalist fringe right.  

In 2016 every European nation's National Front is crawling out from
under its rock and yawning for fresh air.   Modern Euro kids kinda
like these guys in jackboots, they vaguely know that the fascists
genuinely scare the straights, for some reason.   In 2016's
Tumblr-based social-media European neofascism, it's all about cool
metal-band political logos and white-power tattoos for cute blonde
girls.

17. And finally there's the USA, where I rather imagine that the
WELL SoTW will be giving TheDonald more free publicity.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #46 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 16 06:34

    
*Here is our brandy decanter shaped like a Nikola Tesla memorial
climate-wrecking light bulb.  You may have thought I was kidding
about that. Nope. 

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/23584368783/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #47 of 179: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Wed 6 Jan 16 08:46

    
"What do the Russians do after Putin?  Is there any kind of unifying
vision for them?  Do they have any idea what they want from
themselves and the world?"

I also wonder, what do Russians want FOR themselves?

If you pay attention to the demographics, it's clear that Russia is
in the midst of a hard fall. The population is hollowing out at the
same time that the Putin regime has squelched any semblance of
economic diversification or modernization in favor of oil-driven
kleptocracy.

Conditions in Russia seem closer to the Russia of the late 19th
century, with Moscow, Petersburg, and a few other cities around the
rim prospering while the rest of the country barely gets by, than to
even the late Soviet era of perestroika.

On a personal level, the emergence of Putin's Russia as a
geopolitical spoiler in the past few years has been enthralling,
because it's made my undergraduate education in Soviet-American
relations and Russian relevant to the 21st century.   

I spent most of the fall working out of a small city in Norway 10
miles from the Russian border. I was there the day Turkey shot down
the Russian fighter jet. Sitting in Kirkenes, it felt a lot more
alarming and threatening and relevant to my daily life than it would
have if I'd been at home in New York City, and brought home how
fragile things seem to be in Europe right now.

But stepping away from my little intellectual gratifications, I
really worry for the Russians. How many times can they get stepped
on by modern history before they collapse completely?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #48 of 179: david gault (dgault) Wed 6 Jan 16 09:35

    

On the other hand, the Russians have endured and
survived through many previous collapses.
They may be better positioned than their 
rivals in Europe and North America, if collapse
is in the cards. 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #49 of 179: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Wed 6 Jan 16 10:22

    
Enduring and surviving is not thriving, never mind progressing. Most
of Europe, and North America, have managed to emerge from several
crises over the past 150 years with the frameworks of democracy and
pluralism relatively intact. Russia has no such experience. 

Further, the less ordered things are in Russia, the more likely they
will continue to pull fossil fuels out of the ground after 2050, and
raze rather than save their forests. Both have enormous consequences
for climate change.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #50 of 179: Andy Dupont (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 16 12:06

    
Via email from Andy Dupont:

Hello and thank you all again for consolidating and documenting your
conversation for us once more. I look forward to reading your
responses for the next two weeks as we all look forward with tepid
anticipation to 2016.

I want to ask, what are your thoughts about virtual reality looking
forward? It seems like every year there is a new "killer app", a
higher refresh rate, a lower latency, a cheaper consumer model, etc.
But we never achieve the Snow Crash / Neuromancer techno-utopian
virtual reality that we've always been promised.

Will virtual reality remain in the realm of the flying car or is the
surrounding ecosystem finally ready to make this technology a part
of our daily life?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #51 of 179: Dodge (dodge1234) Wed 6 Jan 16 18:05

    
I'd be interested to know what form 3D scanners and producers will
take and how they will impact us in the coming years.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #52 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 16 18:17

    
> have managed to emerge from several crises over the past 150 
> years with the frameworks of democracy and pluralism relatively
intact.

In the USA, voter turnout is low, and there are various ways the
vote is manipulated, so there's a question whether we have a truly
democratic process. Furthermore, most corporations, organizations,
agencies etc. are not organized or run democratically, and if the
general mode of organization is not democratic, democratic
governance is a largely unrealized ideal. 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #53 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 7 Jan 16 00:30

    <scribbled by tcn Thu 7 Jan 16 00:31>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #54 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 7 Jan 16 00:33

    
It's like deja vu all over again (Yogi Berra) 

Looks like another economic tsunami is rolling in, are we in for
another global meltdown?

China halts trading:
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/08/business/dealbook/china-shanghai-stocks-fall
.h
tml?_r=0

A quadrillion here, a quadrillion there:
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/this-is-how-much-money-exists-in-the-entire-w
or
ld-in-one-chart-2015-12-18

1.2 trillion in derivatives, U.S. has 57% of its money tied up in
them. Cool fiscal planning there. 

Is this all chicken little stuff or are we in for another bumpy
ride. 'We' not including the 1% of course...they might lose a yacht
or club membership or two, buy, hey, times are tough for them.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #55 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 16 04:53

    
*Americans used to have all kinds of practical "reform" advice for
Russia, but that's worse than useless now.  If you show up in Russia
and tell 'em to follow the American Dream, it's like showing up with
whooping cough at a house party for tuberculosis.

*I tend to think that the newly-militarized Russians are actually
off their bed of pain, though.  If anybody's pitifully drinking
themselves to death nowadays, it's the American middle class.

*Also, when it comes to aggressive de-globalization, Russia might
actually be a vanguard.  They're not gonna win any converts with
their weird neo-Czarist Russian Orthodox routine, but Putin has
plenty of admirers among other nation-state leaders and is
skyrocketingly popular in Russia.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #56 of 179: lovevolv (lovevolv) Thu 7 Jan 16 05:36

    
Practical simple steps each of us can & should take??
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #57 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 16 05:46

    
Meanwhile in the USA, governance if fogged by leadership that
famously committed "to get [government] down to the size where we
can drown it in the bathtub." The president gamely leads as well as
he can through tenuous executive action. Right-wing billionaires
control media channels and fund grassroots agitprop campaigns via
astroturf websites and viral email networks. An unlikely bloviating
presidential contender captures airwaves and mindshare while serious
candidates and issues are sidelined, driven into media gutters and
alleyways, out of sight and out of mind.

But life goes on. We experiment with alternatives: digital
currencies and bartering systems, co-operative businesses, maker
havens and hackerspaces, resilient communities. When the
mainstream's gone insane, the sane retreat to the fringes...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #58 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 7 Jan 16 06:26

    
Good points Jon. These storms, too, shall pass.

Bruce, 're: Putin and his friends. Do we just not get it? Would you
please elaborate a bit on why they like him and what possible
futures the 'Stans are seeing and hoping to happen for themselves?
Is Putin's political agenda evolving? Is he capable of going with
the flow should the Stans go off in other directions?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #59 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 16 06:32

    
<lovevolv> slipped in while I was posting, asking about practical
steps. 

Here's one thought...

I spend a lot of time working with and thinking about
non-governmental organizations and nonprofits, the sort of
organizations Paul Hawken wrote about in his book _Blessed Unrest_,
published in 2007. He talked hopefully about a worldwide movement
for social and environmental change. He was seeing the evolution and
growth of the many global social justice and environmental groups as
"the largest movement in the world." 

I can't see that these groups have had much effect, though I imagine
the world would be far worse without them.

Part of the issue with all these NGOs is that their struggle with
sustainability often interferes with their commitment to mission:
i.e., if you're under-resourced and have to spend your time and
resources collecting money, you don't have as much energy to focus
on the real work you set out to do. You find yourself running a lot
of petitions to churn influence, but also to attract donations to
the cause. It's a big question whether the petitions actually create
influence or make an impact on the problem you're trying to solve.

An obvious conclusion here is that these orgs need help. They need
donations, and they need volunteer energy. So one thing you can do
is become an activist and supporter for an organization focused on
something you care about.

But I don't think that's enough.

I've been an Internet activist since the early 90s, and I was there
when the first email campaigns were rolling out, orchestrated by
Shabbir Safdar of Voters Telecommunications Watch and Jonah Seiger
of the Center for Democracy and Technology. (Shabbir and Jonah later
consulted with Moveon.org when it was forming, and influenced its
use of email for activism).

What bothered me about email campaigns, which often had signing a
petition as a call to action, was that they didn't make the
recipients smarter about the issue at hand. You could get someone to
sign a petition that they didn't completely understand. I thought it
would be more powerful to build a based of truly informed activists
who had dug into the details and nuances of an issue, and thought
hard about alternatives and solutions. That wasn't happening and
isn't happening.

But I often see ad hoc clusters of people coming together and
talking, and through conversation going deeper. This might be via
meetups, or salons, or house parties.

Long-winded answer, but the "practical step" I advocate is that we
all convene and/or attend conversational groups, talk about the
problems we care about, and get smarter about them. Collaborative
intelligence is an important part of the solution to the fix we're
in. And I don't think you get smarter by reading emails or chunks of
information on the web, probably not even by reading periodicals and
books. Think of it this way: all that information you get by reading
has to be activated and honed in order to become real, actionable
intelligence. And it can be activated by conversation, debate... and
by thinking together with others, as a group.

What all those NGOs need, more than donations or signatures on
petitions, is intelligent support from activists who understand.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #60 of 179: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 7 Jan 16 06:48

    
>In the USA, voter turnout is low, and there are various ways the
vote is manipulated, so there's a question whether we have a truly
democratic process...

Yes, hence why I wrote "frameworks of democracy." No one could be
more convinced than me that the system has been bought; it's just
that the mechanisms for buying it back are still largely in place,
waiting for the pendulum to swing. 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #61 of 179: Joel Westerberg (tux) Thu 7 Jan 16 14:38

    
Isn't the problem that internet killed counterculture? There's 
no Us & Them in the easygoing cultural sampladelic world of 
2016? There's no place for high weirdness in a world that is
an electric smorgasbord. Everything has it's own youtube channel.
Even spooncarvers are networking on facebook.

Geek culture as an expression of otherness is a thing hopelessly 
lost to the past. Not that I don't enjoy it, but it's just not
all that happening culturally.

Looking back at old issues of Mondo 2000, one can think that
all that came to pass, and this is where we are now, but now 
what? The open internet wasn't prepared for the behavioural 
analysis of the stacks, maybe the next counterculture will be 
a group of renegade psychologists that will shape the future?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #62 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 7 Jan 16 16:14

    
(tux) excellent!

Makes me wonder if the only way to have another counterculture is to
unplug entirely, do a reverse Timothy Leary, "unplug, drop in"
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #63 of 179: Never were the way she was (jet) Thu 7 Jan 16 20:05

    
Going back a bit:

> China made a lot of money 

I'm close to 50 and how the world works has changed in ways I couldn't
have imagined back when I was going to Armadillocon or got my
"CLACKER" custom license plate in California.

When someone says "China made a lot of money", they didn't make money,
they shifted digits on bank accounts.  How did their air pollution and
other costs of "make a lot of money" translate to air quality in Tokyo
or costs of consumer products in the US?

Let's say India does to China what China did to western factories --
does the "money" in China move to India or is the Chinese money
devalued by the new strength of Indian money?

Here in the US, what does that do to our concept of money?  Or do my
barter relationships with locals gain more strength against the
abstract idea of "money"?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #64 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 16 02:06

    
#18 of 60: bill braasch (bbraasch) Tue 05 Jan 2016 (10:15 AM)

Facebook's Free Basic service was shut down in Egypt and India. 
This cloud thing is controversial because 1) it usurps the powers
that be?  or 2) it
data mines the serfs?  or 3) both? or 4) neither?

*The Indian and Egyptian power-players just aren't buying into the
pitch there.  They know perfectly well it's not about "free basic
Internet service," it's all about Zuckerberg, a billionaire
maharajah of the Internet Counterrevolution.  

*Why give this ultra-rich American Jewish guy the run of their Arab
and Hindu national infrastructures?  Did he offer them nice bribes? 
Will it help them crush their enemies?  Will it annihilate internal
subversion?  Heck no it won't; in Egypt, Facebook was obviously the
ruin of the country.  

*So where is the benefit for Indian and Egyptian de-globalizing
national elites? What's in it for them?  Nothing but trouble. 
Zuckerberg and his "free" access can take a hike.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #65 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 16 02:06

    

lovevolv (lovevolv) Thu 07 Jan 2016 (05:36 AM)

Practical simple steps each of us can & should take??


*I had to live in Europe for years to understand this, but this is a
deeply American question. It's "pragmatism." Pragmatism has its
benefits.

*As an American often on the ground in eastern Europe, I'm
consistently surprised by how much I can publicly contribute by
simple, practical approaches. Such as: "So, your toilet is leaking
all over the floor, is it?  Did you try taking the top off and
looking inside the toilet?  You didn't? What's all this ancient rust
in here?"  I'm no plumber, but nobody but an American would dream of
pragmatically intervening and actually looking inside the mysterious
works there. 

*I've even adopted some design principles that seem simple and
practical to me.  "Steps" that I, in fact, commonly take.  I didn't
invent them, I adopted them from other design theorists, but I can
boldly claim that these simple principles have genuinely improved my
quality of life.

*I concentrate very hard on everyday objects -- intimate, immediate
things --  rather than on aspirational status luxuries. I remove
things if I don't regularly interact with them or share them. I
clear my space and time of obsolete tools that no longer efficiently
perform a useful function.  

*When I stumble over some possession of mine, I don't thoughtlessly
assume, in standard consumer-culture fashion, "Oh well, this is a
good thing, it's been around here a long time, it's kind of nice,
I'm used to it, it cost a lot once." Instead, I ask what it is doing
now to earn the privilege of being in my immediate vicinity and
taking up my attention.  Quite often the answer is that it is doing
nothing much, and hasn't seen pragmatic use for quite a while. In
which case it should be given away, stored, sold, recycled or
removed.

*1. Beautiful things 2. Emotionally important things. 3. Efficient
and useful tools.  4. Everything else.  The harmful number-four
"everything else" category pretty much needs to go.  With the
passage of time, most everything relentlessly trends toward
"everything else."  Entropy requires no maintenance.

*If "each of us" adopted these "practical, simple steps," then we'd
be living in a quite different culture.   However, these steps
require a lot of mindfulness, which is always troublesome to people.
It's far-fetched to think that everyone would always be able to live
those principles daily.  Personally, I tend to observe them in
spring-cleaning fits.

*What's actually happening in the material culture of the
Twenty-Teens is a dematerialization of objects into apps on handheld
devices owned and controlled by the GAFAM Big Five, along with a
kind of Uberization of bourgeois possessions into financialized,
on-off, network-centric, "blank-as-a-service."  The "Internet of
Things" is on the way.  Quite an interesting story, but it's pretty
much anything but "simple."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #66 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 16 02:11

    
*Those practical and simple steps.  This seemingly honest, direct,
Ben Franklin-style, problem-solving approach has its limits.  

Your apparently "practical" approach is never universally practical.
It's an emanation of what you yourself think should practically be
happening. You're not the universe, you're just some American guy,
even if you're the genius Ben Franklin.  Your practicality is not
objective reality. It's your own approach, and others don't share
it. They can't. They never will.

*Take this intimate problem, for instance: the teenage daughter is
sobbing unbearably. She's dented the sheetrock walls with her aching
head… What could be wrong?  She's afflicted by adolescent
menstruation!  Buy her an Advil and a heating pad!

*These practical, simple steps don't solve the tragic human
condition of womanhood. But they're pretty good steps -- to an
extent. She's better off than the suffering teenage girl next door
who lacks that painkiller and the plug-in gizmo. You were pragmatic!
You frankly admitted the problem, at least; you didn't lie about it
or conceal it, out of delicacy, shame or taboo. So you did okay.

*The downside of pragmatism ---"Just fix the problem! Do something
practical! Simple! Honest!"  is when you get aggressive about it,
and apply it to mutilate the full dimensions of the situation.  Fed
up with her endless whining, you might snap at the teenager, "Your
grumpy mood problems don't affect our family mortgage! Everything's
great except for you! The bottom line seems just fine, so let's just
change the subject!" 

*Then, to your startled amazement, she  hangs herself while you are
fixing the garage door. The garage door was doable.  Your daughter
is no more fixable than you yourself are fixable.  

*"Without vision the people perish." You imagined that you were
brusquely, efficiently cutting to the chase, simply fixing the
practical problems, making everything all better, but your
self-centered crassness destroyed her will to live.  

*Your pragmatic solutionism betrayed you. Your philosophy of solving
wrecked you.  Instead of "being practical," you should have told
your daughter something soulful, tender, heartfelt, vague,
supportive, mushy, lyrical and open-ended: "Just hold on through
this, my darling!  The pain only lasts a few days, it always gets
better!  Never doubt that mom and I will always love you!
Generations of women have been through this trial that you are
suffering!  Read female poets who can illuminate your spiritual
ordeal for you!  Anybody but Sylvia Plath!"

*I'm a pragmatist myself, but I've learned to deploy it with some
care, and not use it to razor off every aspect of existence.  I'm a
futurist, but I know that a lot of guys called "futurists" are
basically motivational speakers.  Some of them are pretty good
trend-spotters, sharp and alert people, but they realize that the
audience can't emotionally survive on a diet of analysis.  The
futurist's core audience is anxious about the future; they want and
need somebody to cheer them up.  

*The truth is, some of the audience have no future. In any large
crowd of X thousand people, some subset-of-X are gonna be
statistically dead by next year.  Any insurance guy knows that.  
It's the simple and practical truth, but it's cruel to reveal it;
it's brutal frankness.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #67 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 16 02:13

    
#58 of 60: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 07 Jan 2016 (06:26 AM)

Bruce, 're: Putin and his friends. Do we just not get it? Would you
please elaborate a bit on why they like him and what possible
futures the 'Stans are seeing and hoping to happen for themselves?
Is Putin's political agenda evolving? Is he capable of going with
the flow should the Stans go off in other directions?

*Well, I think that people more or less get it; the Russians are
secretive, but they're not so wildly enigmatic as all that.  There
was a hostile revolution next door in Ukraine; Putin stole the part
of the country with the naval base; then the Russian-speaking chunk
of Ukraine counter-rebelled against the rebels in Kiev and wanted to
join him, so he had to put up with their aspirations even though it
meant sanctions and a shooting war.

*Under the modern dispensation, you're really not supposed to, just,
well, steal Crimea.  Sure, you can invade other countries, topple
hostile regimes, kill people with drones pretty much anywhere, but
just sawing off a chunk of somebody else's country, putting your own
flag on it and declaring it's your own country, there's no way that
Brussels or Washington are gonna like that.  

*Putin knows there's no way to justify Crimea, so he's got a
two-fold strategy.  A, just hang on until the adversaries get tired
of complaining and sanctioning, and B, undermine political will with
just an amazing tidal wave of Kremlin-troll bullshit.  Just use
cheap digital media to lie, distort, deny, dismiss, around the
clock, methodically, endlessly.  The point to trolling is not to win
the argument.  It's to muddy the waters so much that nobody can
drink.  

*With previous forms of media, if you blatantly lied all the time
you'd be shamed out of it by the gatekeepers, but if there are no
media gatekeepers, then you can troll.  It's information warfare
under conditions of modern Internet Counterrevolution.  

*You try to keep as much order in your local media as you can, and
then you recruit network foot soldiers to hand-throw dirt-bombs into
everybody else's media.  You won't convince them that your course is
just and right (because it's not), but maybe you can paralyze their
political will.  Get inside the ol' OODA Loop there; disrupt the
adversary's ability to observe, orient, decide and act.

*I think that describes what Putin is doing, and it's not stunningly
weird or a failure on our part to sympathize with him.  The guy's
from the intelligence services.  Spooks by their nature are very
keen on media dirty-tricks, every spook apparatus does at least some
of it.  He's got plenty of ardent neo-nationalist Russians to help
him troll; he doesn't have to fling the mud personally.

*What's different nowadays derives from the current structure of
media. This isn't 1955, you can't jam Radio Free Europe.  But maybe
you can just fill up the airwaves with gaudy noise, lots of
meme-style chaff and smoke-bombs.  Just throw troll-spaghetti in all
directions, see if anything sticks. You're not seeking tender
understanding from Americans, it's not a charm-offensive.  It's the
new "Troll-State" approach.  

*I never saw it done  quite like this before, but I guess some
nation had to try it.  It's like climate-denialism, basically. 
However, instead of being run out of K-Street by Exxon-Mobil and the
coal interests to deter legislation, it's run from the Kremlin to
consolidate gains and deter the spread of a shooting-war.

*It's very contemporary.  Donald Trump gets it.  Trump and Putin
quite admire one another: they both think they know what it takes
nowadays, and that they've got plenty of it.  Trump is the Troll
Candidate.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #68 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 8 Jan 16 03:38

    
(bruces) Thanks for that response, makes the Trump connection
perfectly clear now.

What about the 'stans, they all seem to be wanting to go off in
their own directions? Putin isn't about to let that happen is he? Or
is the new alliances the 'stans are making with China and India and
the new "Silk Road" too much for him to challenge...

You know, the old trope from Princess Bride, '''"and don't get into
a land war with China"
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #69 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 8 Jan 16 06:11

    
In #59 above I suggested creating or joining conversational groups
focused on issues of interest, beyond vicarious actions, as in
responding to emails and donating to mission-driven NPOs who are
Doing The Work. In a private conversation, someone told me that
these ad hoc conversations are unlikely to have an impact on the
distribution of power. I responded that "knowledge is power," or as
he rephrased it, "knowledge potentiate power." 

Granted that mere conversation won't do much, there's more to be
said. And of course, it doesn't take the place of organizing and
working the system, it's a supplement.

This is a US-centric thought. Clusters of thoughtful conversation in
some parts of the world might invite beheading, or worse.

If you want participatory governance or "democracy," the
conversations have to happen. Democracy isn't a voting mob, it's not
a vote at all - we sometimes confuse majoritarianism with democracy.
If you want people to participate, to influence decisions, they have
to know WTF they're deciding about, and have an intelligent
perspective on it. This is so rare and so difficult, practically
speaking, we never have democracies at all in the real sense of the
term, and however close we might get to the democratic ideal, we
eventually drift.

Donald Trump comes to mind. Whatever you might think about him,
about his prospects as a U.S. presidential candidate, he's been a
great case study and proof that you can't overestimate the "wisdom
of the crowd." 

Check out Trump's Politifact profile:
http://www.politifact.com/personalities/donald-trump/ His statements
are 1% true, 39% false, 22% "pants on fire." 99% of what he says is
some degree of false. Yet he has a huge following, many of them
seemingly intelligent people. What do they like about him? "He
speaks his mind." I really doubt that.

But he's a showman, he plays to the emotions, he's doing stand-up
politics.

If he loses the nomination or drops out... he hasn't really lost,
because he's build a substantial base of power, and commanded
fungible attention. Without telling the truth.

Those trump supporters could hold monthly meetups, salon-style, and
lie like dogs to each other for an hour or two at a time. A nuanced
and well-considered pack of lies is still a pack of lies. This is
the weakness of the suggestion I made.  To make people smarter,
you'd have to include a commitment to critical thinking, and
facilitation to keep the conversation on the rails.

Critical thinking, digging for truth, complete honesty - hard to
achieve, increasingly rare, probably impossible in some parts of the
world.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #70 of 179: Ari Davidow (ari) Fri 8 Jan 16 06:32

    
About a year ago, I became sufficiently depressed by the
polarization in US (and global) politics. I rejoined a local
political coalition that has done good work in the past on issues
ranging from healthcare to housing and education. Right now, a major
focus is criminal justice reform. For the first time I can recall,
the group is calling for a "Day of Fasting" as a prelude to
addressing the more general tone of discourse and "rejecting the
language of otherness":

"In the charged rhetoric of our times, the demonization of the other
- from Mexican immigrants to Muslims to other marginalized
minorities– has become commonplace. [We] invite congregants from all
of our faith traditions to four diverse houses of worship, to
develop relationships, learn about each other’s traditions and
affirm our shared values and common humanity."

I have no idea whether this will attain any traction, but I am
hopeful that 2016 will be a year in which calling for such discourse
will be part of what reaches people. Of course, this is also an
election year, so I may be blowing smoke.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #71 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 8 Jan 16 10:45

    
A report from the Anthropocene Working Group:
http://quaternary.stratigraphy.org/workinggroups/anthropocene/

"The 'Anthropocene' is a term widely used since its coining by Paul
Crutzen and Eugene Stoermer in 2000 to denote the present time
interval, in which many geologically significant conditions and
processes are profoundly altered by human activities. These include
changes in: erosion and sediment transport associated with a variety
of anthropogenic processes, including colonisation, agriculture,
urbanisation and global warming. the chemical composition of the
atmosphere, oceans and soils, with significant anthropogenic
perturbations of the cycles of elements such as carbon, nitrogen,
phosphorus and various metals. environmental conditions generated by
these perturbations; these include global warming, ocean
acidification and spreading oceanic 'dead zones'. the biosphere both
on land and in the sea, as a result of habitat loss, predation,
species invasions and the physical and chemical changes noted
above."

...

"The beginning of the 'Anthropocene' is most generally considered to
be at c. 1800 CE, around the beginning of the Industrial Revolution
in Europe (Crutzen's original suggestion); other potential
candidates for time boundaries have been suggested, at both earlier
dates (within or even before the Holocene) or later (e.g. at the
start of the nuclear age). A formal 'Anthropocene' might be defined
either with reference to a particular point within a stratal
section, that is, a Global Stratigraphic Section and Point (GSSP),
colloquially known as a 'golden spike; or, by a designated time
boundary (a Global Standard Stratigraphic Age)."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #72 of 179: lovevolv (lovevolv) Fri 8 Jan 16 15:46

    
superb discourse, thank you for all of it including responses to my
'practical' query. 
yes, i happen to be american (both coasts); living in switzerland
for half a decade. everyone asks, 'don't you miss new york?' and i
say, 'no'. 
well it's not that simple... or is it? 
everyone's on facebook ...

speaking of which, one can go pretty far to effect real (practical)
change right there, without the need for other platforms for quite a
while.
however...

one more question, perhaps a request for a redux/ remix, of an
inkwell from some time back with ethan zuckerman. he was throwing
down on the topic of echo chambers and filter bubbles. has anything
changed, and/or how are these things morphing in the foreseeable
future?  what's the prognosis for most 'users'?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #73 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 16 03:34

    
*I've got an anecdote on the Ukraine situation.

*Last year I edited "Twelve Tomorrows," which is MIT Technology
Review's annual science fiction issue.  I decided to commission a
work from the Deputy Defense Minister of the People's Republic of
Donetsk, which is a warlord enclave in rebel Eastern Ukraine.

This guy, Fyodor (formerly he used "Fedor," the Ukrainian spelling)
Berezin, is a career military science-fiction writer who used to be
a captain in the  former Soviet Union's nuclear missile forces. 
Captain Berezin also writes space-opera sci-fi, but his favorite sub
genre is near-future military speculation.  Much of his work
concerns the prospects of war breaking out in his own region, and
Russia getting back on its feet by rising to the challenge of
foreign aggression.

Captain Berezin's immediate boss in Donetsk, Igor "Strelkov" Girkin,
was the major warlord figure in the early rebellion, and also a
fantasy novelist.   The intimate involvement of science fiction
writing in this dismal shooting-war was something that rather
concerned me.

So I contacted Berezin and got him to write a speculative military 
science fiction story specifically for Americans.  Berezin delivered
the story, which, in its English translation, is called "Panama
Cataclysm."  It details a future nuclear terrorist attack on an
American aircraft carrier in the Panama Canal.  Everybody at "Twelve
Tomorrows" thought it was pretty good, and just what one would want
to hear from a guy with Berezin's point-of-view.  We had it
proofread, typeset, all that good stuff.  

Then we figured out that it was illegal to pay Berezin.  As a
warlord, he's been placed an a US State Department financial
sanctions list.  Since we couldn't pay him, MIT and Techology Review
couldn't print the story.

These financial sanctions lists are very typical of the
Twenty-Teens.  Tens of thousands of people are on them.  They're
effective in peculiar ways; in the case of this Russian-speaking
science fiction writer, they're a form of censorship.  Sure, he can
write whatever he wants, but he can't do business.  It's like the
State Department choking off the credit cards of Wikileaks.  They're
hostiles, so, you know, shut  off their money.

As a writer, I wouldn't want this done to me; obviously it's a
blatant threat to free expression, but I'm thinking that these
sanctions methods are going to multiply. States and non-state actors
alike are gonna find ways to extralegally harass opponents by making
them economic non-persons.  The US is pioneering it because they've
got so much global finance clout, but since the finance and credit
systems are electronic now, I don't doubt there's a lot of other,
clever ways to do it.

Given that economic sanctions lists exist, and they do, there's no
doubt that Berezin belongs on one.  He fits their stated purpose. 
He's not a science fiction colleague who happens to be sorta, kinda
be a warlord.  He was, and is, an armed and uniformed rebel in a
city, Donetsk, that's been blown to hell with heavy artillery in
gruesome siege conditions.  He's a real-deal, no-kidding warlord who
aided and abetted an armed secession to the best of his ability.
However, I consider it a pity that the machineries of the new Cold
War denied him his say in a magazine I edited.  In my opinion, this
is precisely the kind of science fiction that Americans should be
learning more about.

So, if you send me email -- "bruces@well.com" -- then I will
privately send you a copy of Captain Fyodor Berezin's "Panama
Apocalypse," the missing twelfth story in the 2015 'Twelve
Tomorrows.'  The other stories in there, that aren't written by
warlords under sanctions, are also pretty good.  However, you can
buy those.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #74 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 16 03:35

    
63 of 67: Never were the way she was (jet) Thu 07 Jan 2016 (08:05
PM)

Going back a bit:

> China made a lot of money 

When someone says "China made a lot of money", they didn't make
money,
they shifted digits on bank accounts.  How did their air pollution
and
other costs of "make a lot of money" translate to air quality in
Tokyo
or costs of consumer products in the US?

*I hear this "Potemkin Village" argument quite a lot from Americans,
like: the Chinese can't possibly be actually succeeding at doing
something so alien to our understanding of world order.  The Chinese
must be cheating somehow, the whole thing's a put-up job; the
protected yuan is not really money, the state-supported engineering
projects aren't real infrastructure, the moon rockets and giant
Weibo networks are stolen intellectual property,  their markets are
mere Communist facades and not genuine markets,  the colossal scale
of their cyberwarfare doesn't really gain them any benefits, all of
that.

*Maybe it's true, maybe they'll suddenly implode this year because
the Dragon Emperor has no clothes.  But for people who aren't really
rich, the Chinese sure are buying a lot of stuff.  Farmland, mines,
resources, all over the planet.  The Chinese have got multiple
hundreds of billions in US dollar reserves: if that's also funny
money, then we're all just as naked as China is.

*If a people are better-fed, better-housed, better educated and
visibly throwing their weight around on the world stage, then I'm
inclined to presume that events are going their way, and not search
for elaborate theories about how that can't be happening.  

*Not that the Chinese are perfect or anything; successful people in
China tend to vote with their feet and get the hell out of China. 
The air stinks, the secret police kidnap people: life in China is
tough.  But if you compare the China of 2016 to the China of 1986,
their transformation is just amazing.  They're a troubled nation,
but they don't seem to need much condescending advice any more.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #75 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 05:11

    
Then there's China's foray into big media production, specifically
this week's announcement that China's Dalian Wanda Group will buy a
majority stake in Legendary Entertainment, a film company that makes
big budget action-fantasy films that are immensely popular in China
as well as the USA. Wanda also owns AMC Theatres, and in China owns
commercial plazas, five-star hotels, thousands of cinema screens,
department stores and karaoke outlets. 

They're shifting a lot of digits, and it feels as real as
entertainment can be.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #76 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 9 Jan 16 05:15

    
Any responses or comments re: the new Silk Road China is developing
with India and Malaysia? And where do think they fit in with the
BRICI's now, or even better is the BRICI's even a working model any
more?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #77 of 179: Never were the way she was (jet) Sat 9 Jan 16 09:47

    
If that profit is actually being reinvested in Chinese businesses and
doing something about the pollution, that's great.  What I see from
the states is how awful/dangerous Chinese factories are for workers
and commentary on the state of air pollution in China and the lack of
pollution control.

I try to read non-US media when possible, and it's easy to find
coverage about the toxic waste problem in China:

<http://www.spiegel.de/international/spiegel/the-world-s-toxic-waste-dump-choki
ng-on-chemicals-in-china-a-387392.html>

I live in Pittsburgh where we're still dealing with the amount of
pollution generated by the steel business, an industry that collapsed
decades ago.  When steel production went to other countries, the local
factories shut down and left pollution and buildings for someone else
to clean up. (There are similar problems with EPA superfund sites in
the bay area, but that's no longer my backyard.)  Some of the land we
have is unsafe for residential use and has been "brownscaped" into
industrial parks, other areas still have dangerous levels of
pollutants like benzene.

Looking for housing in this area also means learning about "Mine
Subsidence Insurance", sink holes, and learning if there are old coal
mines under your house.  Our house is over old Duquesne coal mines,
Duquesne is still in business as a power company and not responsible
if a sink hole caused by an abandoned coal mine sucks in our house.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #78 of 179: Tim Dedopulos (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 13:47

    
Via email from Tim Dedopulos

Is there anything that we -- the global populace -- can do to head
off further climate damage? Specifically, let's assume for
argument's sake that corporate and political will to mitigate
emissions won't arrive, no matter who we vote for or protest
against, and that science won't provide a sudden fix. If we all
pulled together, could we halt the damage? Or are we entirely at the
mercy of the big guys?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #79 of 179: George McKee (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 13:48

    
Via email from George McKee:

Here are some thoughts for Bruce & Jon.  I can't keep my own views
on these topics from leaking thru, but I'd like to hear what you
think about them.

0. Thanks for continuing this always enlightening and entertaining
series of discussions.  

1. The internet of misdesigned, broken, orphaned, and subverted
things.  I worked in the cybersecurity field, so maybe these
downsides are more visible to me than others.   In general, the
explosive growth of the twentieth century seems to be slowing down. 
Moore's Law is showing visible strain.  "Software engineering" has
been abandoned in favor of rapid development. Software isn't
warrantied to work correctly because there's no statement of what
"working correctly" means.  I try to have a pretty low-tech house
because the high-tech components never work together that well.

At a larger scale, both developed and developing countries having
trouble sustaining growth, and except for a few bright spots, when
growth occurs, it's mostly financial systems feeding on themselves. 
Is there a point of of maximum sustainable complexity for human
civilizations?  How near are we to it?

2. Dead media beat: What media had death certificates issued for
them last year?  Does "the death of long form journalism" count?

3. On the good news sci-fi frontier, I can't get over the sight of
rockets backing down to a landing pad and not tipping over or
blowing up.  Is there anything beyond joyriding and orbital launches
here?  I can't help but wonder if Jeff Bezos  has a secret vision
for Blue Origin and Amazon of "rocket freight" that is more than
logos on trucks.

4. Biotechnology: CRISPR/CAS9 technology means that every genetic
disease is potentially curable. Will regulatory bureaucracies and
healthcare payment systems be able to adapt?  Climate change and
habitat loss in general are causing extinctions faster than
evolution can generate replacements, even with human-assisted
selective breeding and reintroductions.  Will eco-engineering with
GMO's become a counterpart to geoengineering?  Or is that too much
to ask?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #80 of 179: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 13:49

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Speaking of China, here are a couple of stories I thought were
interesting:

China’s makeshift hoverboard industry is imploding after Amazon’s
safety crackdown
http://qz.com/582542/chinas-makeshift-hoverboard-industry-is-imploding-after-a
mazons-safety-crackdown/

Who's investigating fake Chinese goods? Fake investigators
http://bigstory.ap.org/article/99d87da875bc4d58af24d387a7653ba5/whos-investiga
ting-fake-chinese-goods-fake-investigators

Seems like a common industry structure these days is a corporation
lightly regulating goods and services provided by lots of small
suppliers. You can't set up an app store or a social network or an
online marketplace or a taxi service without thinking about how to
search it, rate it, and police it, either in advance or after
customers get scared. But not too much regulation because it cuts
into
profit margins.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #81 of 179: George Mokray (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 14:41

    
Via email from George Mokray:

Oddly enough, I have found myself optimistic for the first time in a
long time about climate change and about energy.  The reasons for
this optimism are geotherapy
(https://www.crcpress.com/Geotherapy-Innovative-Methods-of-Soil-Fertility-Resto
ration-Carbon-Sequestration/Goreau-Larson-Campe/9781466595392), zero net energy building standards, and the rise of microgrids (Solar IS Civil Defense).

Geotherapy is the idea that we can use existing ecological systems
to repair the damage we've done to the environment, that we can even
optimize such systems to make that repair happen much more quickly
than we have previously imagined.  Rattan Lal, the eminent soil
scientist, has stated publicly that using existing geotherapeutic
agricultural and forestry techniques for atmospheric carbon
sequestration into soil we may be able to reduce carbon from 400+
ppm to 270 ppm, pre-industrial levels, within two decades.  And it
will improve soil fertility and tilth at the same time.

California, the EU, and Cambridge, MA are phasing in zero net energy
building standards starting from around 2017 with full adoption by
2030.  We now know how to build even low and moderate income single
family housing all the way up to luxury skyscrapers which produce
all the energy they consume and can do this affordably.  Since the
built environment now absorbs 30-40% of all energy we produce, this
will make a seismic shift in the grid and our energy systems.

In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, the idea of microgrids and
specifically islanding microgrids are coming on strong.  NY, CT, MA,
CA, and other states are building microgrids and developing
standards for microgrids which can contribute as part of the grid
and operate on their own when the grid goes down, safely and
securely.  With the rapid growth of grid-scale storage, through
batteries and other technologies like pumped hydro, heat and cool,
as well as compressed air and hydrogen production, the possibility
of a decentralized and distributed grid is becoming more and more
feasible.

Since I live halfway between Harvard and MIT and publish a weekly
that looks at the Energy (and Other) Events there and in the
community (http://hubevents.blogspot.com), I know that neither
geotherapy nor zero net energy building standards are part of the
policy or science discussions that are now going on in the academic
community.  When I go to events on energy, envrionment, and climate
change, I make sure to bring them up but my voice is almost always
the only one raising these issues.

On the other hand, my political antennae over the last few months
keep reminding me that it feels more and more like the times just
before WWI.  We are almost certainly heading for a reshuffling of
world political and military power as stochastic lone wolves and
global guerrillas from all over the world and the political map ramp
up terroristic violence and global instability.

As for practical ideas, I like the answer Lech Walesa is said to
have given to the question how Solidarity started.  Walesa
supposedly said, "Solidarity started by speaking loud at the bus
stops."  That may be apocryphal but Walesa did plaster his car with
the original Polish Constitution and drive it throughout Gdansk to
spark conversations about freedom.  Speak up, organize, and find
ways to prepare yourself and your loved ones for the next shock
whatever it may be.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #82 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 15:22

    
I couldn't say it better than that last sentence, George. Thanks for
the post. 

In addition to microgrids, I'm finding small nuclear reactors
interesting as part of the energy future (possibly or probably
linked to microgrids).
http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/nuclear-fuel-cycle/power-reactors/small-nucl
ear-power-reactors/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #83 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 15:40

    
Tim Dedopulos asked what we (citizens, ordinary people) can do to
mitigate climate change damage. The New York Times posted some
guidelines recently:
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015/12/03/upshot/what-you-can-do-about-cli
mate-change.html?_r=0, but it was a typical listicle. It's hard to make the dramatic changes we really should be considering. If giving up your private car became a thing, that might help, but it won't be enough. It has to be a societal change, an industrial-strength change, a rejiggering of our thinking at all levels of endeavor. The actions we should be taking have economic consequences that some - many - many who are powerful - find unthinkable. The force of that resistance is a swift current, swimming against it isn't that productive. It'll wear you out, you'll have your own personal extinction event. 

On my worst days, I'm certain we're not going to fix the problem in
time, but then I think how much innovation there's been in the last
century, how many wicked problems we've solved or made better, and
I"m hopeful.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #84 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 16 16:09

    
Good science friction post from George McKee, here's a few hasty
responses...

"Is there a point of of maximum sustainable complexity for human
civilizations?  How near are we to it?"

That's a good "accelerating change" question, or maybe a case of
stating (asking) the obvious. We'll know when we've exceeded the
"maximum sustainable," but can we know when we're approaching it?
Computers facilitate complexity and allow us to manage it to some
extent, but they're as imperfect as their designers, and we all know
the GIGO rule. But I'm more worried about sustainable climate than
sustainable complexity.

"Dead media beat" is a Bruce thing, but I'll say that I don't think
long form journalism is dead, though it's clearly harder to sustain
(that word again).  I think short form, short attention web writing
is so visible, and the business model for journalism so tenuous,
that it's tempting to think those longer pieces aren't being
written. But I find more of them than I can possibly read, if only
in the New Yorker. Journalists still want to write them, and they
still have an audience.

"Rockets backing down" - is what those of us raised on the
space-opera sci-fi of the 50s expected to see all along, and it was
gratifying to see... as it's been gratifying to see the
privatization and industrialization of space, and renewed interest
in space travel. I'm thinking there's a future but it'll be a long
time coming. Might be a hedge against extinction, actually. It's not
clear that we can survive long in space, or that we can truly
colonize planets, but it's a new frontier, and inevitable that we'll
make the effort.
 
"Clustered regularly-interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)"
- genetic manipulation is happening, GMOs aren't going away, but we
really should worry. Garage biotech is exciting scary shit. It could
be that fear will trump science (interesting that I used the word
"trump" there), and genetic innovation will stop cold, regulated
away by legislators who see science as a left-wing conspiracy.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #85 of 179: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 9 Jan 16 20:17

    
From James Ford:

Really enjoying the conversation.

I know it is a few years old, but I recently finished David
Graeber's Debt: The First 5,000 Years. I was wondering if you have
any thoughts on his calls for imagining what a post-capitalist
society looks like? What system of government and economy (if any)
can support a world of 9 billion people living with at least the
potential for them or their children to be successful (yes, there
may be some sweat shop to Internet IPO stories but some people also
win powerball...)? Is debt forgiveness ever possible (yes I know the
GOP recently made it impossible for the IMF to bail out countries as
part of a deal to re-authorize the fund - but maybe best case
scenarios)?

Do you agree with Charlie Stross
(http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2016/01/long-range-forecast.html) that it is an angry white men problem? Do you agree this is related to the breakdown in capitalism's promise of steady growth forever?

Can you imagine any system that provides for the elderly if we are
not in a world of unlimited future growth? What kind of
economy/government if 401(k)s and pension funds can't grow to meet
the needs of the people? What will soon happen in Japan as the
elderly withdraw their savings from Japanes government debt (and
also other western countries as they also age)?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #86 of 179: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 9 Jan 16 20:18

    

Via email from William Cunningham:

I look forward to these discussions every year!

Jon, you say "On my worst days, I'm certain we're not going to fix
the problem in
time, but then I think how much innovation there's been in the last
century, how many wicked problems we've solved or made better, and
I'm hopeful."

I don't think we are going to fix the problem, I think if we are
lucky the problem will fix us.

The change in climate could be an extinction event maybe but I think
it is more likely it will simply be ruinous. Political upheaval
caused by massive population dislocation will wreck the global
system of trade and it will simply no longer be possible to operate
the global carbon consumption machine at anything like current
rates. It will be devastating on the individual level as standard
opf living and wealth are destroyed, but people will still be around
and a smaller scale nation states will probably continue.

Or political upheaval caused by massive population dislocation will
force more effective global resource distribution and management,
and the carbon machine will wind down as alternatives replace it and
lifestyle adaptations occur to permit a still globally connected
population to live within the new climate regime the planet will
impose on us.

Either way, any way I can actually reasonably see it, we've got
p[olitical upheaval caused by massive population dislocation coming.
As Bill Gates might say, we are running that experiment.

When you hear things like "fix the problem" with relation to the
climate, what in your minds is the actual problem, and what would a
fix even look like? 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #87 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 9 Jan 16 21:50

    <scribbled by tcn Sat 9 Jan 16 21:51>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #88 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 9 Jan 16 21:53

    
Julie, have you read The Wealth of the Commons :

http://www.amazon.com/Wealth-Commons-World-Beyond-Market/dp/1937146146
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #89 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 16 04:38

    
*I forgot that the final English-language title of Captain Berezin's
story was "Panama Cataclysm" rather than "Panama Apocalypse."

*I am now personally distributing "Cataclysm" to various interested
parties watching this discussion, so try not to get arrested or
anything.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #90 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 16 04:56

    
http://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/indepth/2016/1/9/hizballah-supporters-taunt-s
tarving-madaya-residents-with-food-pictures

*From "Twitter Revolution" to "Twitter Starvation Siege" with
Twitter trolls taunting the starving with jpegs of tasty food.  This
is in a few short years.  And what next.

*It's really hard to get any more 2016 than this.  It's strange to
realize that we're reached a state of technological development
where civilians can starve to death with Twitter access.  I'm
thinking this psychological warfare atrocity has rather little to do
with the actual people in Madaya and much more  to do with activist
groups on Twitter, thousands of kilometers away, trying to break
each other's morale with hashtag trolling.  

*Basically this activity is the usual taunting "cry me a handful of
tears, social justice warrior," carried to the nth degree. Still,
you really have to wonder at the corrosive effect on civil society
from this kind of demoralizing electronic distance from the facts on
the ground.

*There must be at least a few locals who actually see this wicked
stuff.  Presumably their power-lines are cut Ukraine-style and I
doubt they've got any fiber-optic left, but they must have mobiles, 
cell antennae, generators, even solar panels.  Yeah, in 2016, you
can participate in Internet Counterrevolution from the middle of a
killing field.  "Live from Srebrenica."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #91 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 16 06:46

    
https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/23583039014/

*Wily Serbs labeling the Belgrade bus station in Arabic so as to get
Syrians out of the Balkans and into the  EU as quickly as possible.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #92 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 16 06:56

    
"When you hear things like 'fix the problem' with relation to the
climate, what in your minds is the actual problem, and what would a
fix even look like?"

To me, the problem is preventable human extinction, a terminal
Anthropocene. Extinction at some point is probable, unless we can
escape the expansion and ultimate death of the sun a few billion
years from now. The universe of stars and planets might itself have
an expiration date, in which case we extinction will be ...
ultimately universal. 

A quiet death after eighty or ninety years of life is a blessing,
but suicide at a relatively early age is tragic. Similarly,
preventable extinction of the species brought on by its own willful
action and ignorance is a tragedy at massive scale.

Early action could have reduced the impact of climate change; I
suspect we're too far along now to do more than adapt. That
reactionary politics and overriding greed prevented us from taking
action two decades ago is tragic. That we're committed, as a
species, to self-destructive behavior, is tragic. 

A fix would have been timely coordinated human action to control
emissions. A fix now might be action and innovation to control
emissions as best we can, but also to adapt to potentially
catastrophic climate changes that now seem inevitable. Many of us
promoted a culture of sustainability for years to no avail, but
sustainability thinking is still churning along, and that culture
may still emerge, especially as the results of our actions and
inactions become more evident. A sequence of catastrophes could be
sobering.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #93 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 16 07:03

    
These people in Kyrgyzstan know how to deal with tragedy... go
shopping and flash opera:

https://globalvoices.org/2016/01/09/kyrgyzstan-staged-its-first-opera-flash-mo
b-in-a-bishkek-supermarket-it-was-magical/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #94 of 179: R.U. Sirius (rusirius) Sun 10 Jan 16 13:25

    
There’s a narrative that’s popular particularly among economic
conservatives, but also among mainstream politicos in general, that
contrary to popular sentiments, things are going pretty great
because the poorest of the worlds’ poor people are doing better …
there has been a global reduction in poverty. They point to UN
statistical reports and so forth. We’re supposed to conclude that
neoliberal globalized markets are pretty awesome.  I wonder if Bruce
has explored this arguments and what his thoughts are about them.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #95 of 179: Never were the way she was (jet) Sun 10 Jan 16 16:58

    
> A quiet death after eighty or ninety years of life is a blessing, but
> suicide at a relatively early age is tragic.

Is it suicide if you don't know what's killing you?  I'm thinking of
the problems the Romans had with lead (ex
<http://penelope.uchicago.edu/~grout/encyclopaedia_romana/wine/leadpoisoning.ht
ml>)
and the possible link between leaded gasoline and violent crime in the
20th century
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2013/01/lead-crime-link-gasoline>.

Not to say that global warming *isn't* a problem, but is it the most
likely method of suicide by the human race or just the easiest one to
point out?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #96 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 16 02:22

    

http://www.wired.com/?p=1958250

*Why doesn't some rich ex-punk in San Francisco give V. Vale $20K
and get it over with?  I'm one of the only financial supporters of
this legendary voice of Bay Area Bohemia, which is visibly dwindling
away, just like Kerouac drowning his sorrows, as posh Googlers climb
the Special Bus with their pants pockets bursting with cash!  Why am
I, some Texo-Serbian-Italian gypsy scholar, pay-palling this
faithfully every goddamn year just so I can watch his own town
methodically prune his scene to pieces?  It seems absurd.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #97 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 16 05:05

    
That link doesn't seem to work, is this the right one?
http://www.wired.com/beyond-the-beyond/2016/01/v-vales-research-newsletter-146
/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #98 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 16 07:05

    
*It embarrasses me I should ever trust Conde Nast's wonky bot
link-shorteners, as opposed to the time-honored human skills of Jon
Lebkowsky.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #99 of 179: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Mon 11 Jan 16 13:33

    
From Grant Henninger, via email:


On the topic of "rockets backing down to a landing pad," there is
something that has been bothering me with the whole commercial space
endeavor. What can be produced in space that requires humans, that
can be sold on Earth? Even with less expensive spaceflight, I'm
unsure how it leads to a human-centric economy in cislunar space.
Without at least a plausible promise for the development of a
space-based economy, how do we become a multi-planetary species able
to survive the almost inevitable collapse of our home ecosystem?
(i.e. How do we achieve Elon's dream without relying upon the
billionaires to throw their money away?)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #100 of 179: (fom) Mon 11 Jan 16 21:06

    
Everyone should subscribe to Vale's newsletter. It's important.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #101 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:17

    
 R.U. Sirius (rusirius) Sun 10 Jan 2016 (01:25 PM)

There’s a narrative that’s popular particularly among economic
conservatives, but also among mainstream politicos in general, that
contrary to popular sentiments, things are going pretty great
because the poorest of the worlds’ poor people are doing better …
there has been a global reduction in poverty. They point to UN
statistical reports and so forth. We’re supposed to conclude that
neoliberal globalized markets are pretty awesome.  I wonder if Bruce
has explored this arguments and what his thoughts are about them.

********************

*Well, I've certainly noticed such screeds myself. I applaud RU/Ken
for his sensitive cultural antennae there. However, I don't entirely
agree with the premise of the question.  

*Commonly, yes, it is conservatives who like to trot out the
ever-popular Pangloss "Best of All Possible Worlds" line. 
Conservatives are always in favor of the established order, for
conserving it is their very purpose.  "If it's not broke, don't fix
it."  They may be benefiting by it personally -- but they don't lie
about it their fondness for it.  They live sincerely within the Dad
Knows Best camp.  

*I can hear that argument: because I've lived in places where the
established order went straight to hell.  Hell: pretty bad! 
Bridges, plumbing, power lines, health-care, education, civil
rights: pretty good!

*With that said, the Right has no lock-in on empty, upbeat
motivational chatter.  It is very human.  The Left has quite a
similar line, almost as rigid, just as time-honored.  

*"Keep Hope Alive. We Shall Overcome." The people of the Left need
to struggle. Why? Because the aspirational, progressive vigor of
"the  struggle" is inherently good in and of itself, regardless of
the pragmatic outcome.  Whatever is conserved by the ideological
adversary is whatever should be changed.  If we don't find some
popular discontent, we gotta whip up some. For the sake of our grand
old party tradition, basically.  

*In this oppositional cultural sensibility, a "progressive" can
never err, any more than a "conservative" can err within his own.
Even though time passes relentlessly, no "progressive" can ever
become archaic, by definition. If some failure within that alleged
"progress" occurs, it is never some straightforward political
blunder -- like, say, the catastrophic Prohibition amendment in the
USA.  No: any failure of the aspirations of the Left is always about
a poisonous false consciousness. 

*The people need to rise up, stand up, that's all!  If only those
disenchanted, sadly pessimistic masses could catch onto their actual
class interests!  Get out there, pep 'em up, organize them for a
better world!  One rush and a push and the land is ours.

*I don't want to engage in false-equivalencies here; I don't claim
that the left and right in 2016 are merely Red versus Blue.  The
American right has visibly lost its senses and has abandoned contact
with objective reality. The American left is conservative: it's
reduced to the prosper of Hillary Clinton, an elderly,
backward-looking figure whose meager political appeal, such as it
is, is 1990s nostalgic. 

*That's a painful thing to say within an American domestic context.
However, nobody living outside the paranoid armed borders of the USA
has any delusions about the state of sentiments within it. Even a
teenage semiliterate Kurdish rug-weaving housewife can read the
political barometer about (a) some inevitable Yankee bombs and (b)
frenzied waves of Yankee bombs.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #102 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:21

    


*So: what is really different in 2016 about the modern radical
"conservatism"?  The problem is that the global market neoliberal
capitalism of the go-go 1990s, the Washington Consensus child of a
previous Clinton Administration, has nothing much to offer to
"conservatives."  It is a libertarian ideology, it is globalized,
flat, de-cultured, agnostic, value-free.  The economic liberty
offers nothing to conserve. There is no cozy status-quo to be
conservative about, under Internet Counterrevolution.  

*The haywire global market is not a force for anyone's cultural
stability.   It suffers repeated wrenching crises -- vastly bigger
and weirder than bonkers little Bitcoin, even -- while the only
visible major winners from the decaying status quo are the Chinese
Comintern and maybe 80  people, the lottery-winners, the few,
freaky, off-the-charts mogul oligarchs, who are the one percent's,
1% one percent.  These freaked-out Koch Bros types, yanked from
their obscurity by the invisible robot hand of the 2010s market, 
are nowhere near "conservative."  No genuine and sincere political
or cultural "conservative" would ever trust these contemporary
monsters with a burnt-out match.  

*The "Stacks"?  Worse!  Bezos owns the Washington Post!

*So, the dismally bewildered American "conservative" Right is, in
historical fact, super-radical now. They're not conservative in any
historical sense of that term.  They're  one sneeze away from armed
insurrection.  They would promptly go for that,  in a full-bore Tea
Party style, except for the stark fact that the various cults of the
fractured Right would first turn their Walmart guns on each other. 
Like any social group seized by unreasonable fanaticism, they fear
their own heretics much more than they fear the unbelievers.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #103 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:25

    


*That's the existent 2016 situation.  It's acute within the USA, but
not different in kind from political developments elsewhere; it's
just the manifestation of genuinely global problems within the
hegemon power.  It's pretty bad news that we lack a functional
conservative attitude  (conservatism should never be a "movement"). 
In many ways, it's like the world-wide destabilization of Islam,
where a customarily sleepy and silent demographic loses its
composure and starts blowing up its own mosques. 

*So, to return to RU's assertion there, I do get it about the peppy
Optimists Club attitude -- it's a matter of temperament, some people
like it and emotionally need it. However, this forced-march optimism
that RU is talking about has a creepy, whistling past the graveyard
feel to me. I don't think it's healthy for us.  

*Sure, it's great that infant mortality is down within the Former
Third World. That happened because the medical fixes became cheap,
not because the powers-that-be give any damn about the well-being of
infants. Infant mortality in the US is sky-high -- not to mention
the USA's unique and endless political frenzies about abortion and
child-care.

*But why dwell not the problems?  "Things are groovy, calm down,
there's never been a better time to be alive!" I do hear the
rose-tinted goggles appeal, but I don't just parse the UN
statistics, I actually live in this world. I'm out for lunch today
on Jan 11, 02106.  It is shirt-sleeve weather on the Danube today in
early January, on a river where people use to ice-skate.  

*I don't have to be a professional grievance-monger to recognize
that the planet's physical reality is seriously imperiled.  It's not
the immediate, biblically Apocalyptic end of the world that the
world's poles are melting away in 2016. However, any society that
would allow that numbed drift into  genuine, world-scale security
threat should never be preaching a hands-off, go along get along,
laissez-faire philosophy.  Nobody can laissez their faire when their
house is underwater and their suburbs are on fire.  It's unbearably,
fatally stupid,like dreamily saying that malaria comes from bad air
while your child dies of fever sweating on a cot.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #104 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:30

    

*The morale-boosting gets tragicomical after a while, ludicrous,
like that raucous last reel of MONTY PYTHON'S LIFE OF BRIAN, where
the main lead of the film has been crucified, and the miserable
doomed and condemned are cheering one other up with fatal nails
pounded through them.  "Aw c'mon Brian!  Chin up boy!  Give it a
little whistle!  Always look on the bright side of life!"

*I saw that film, and I laughed raucously, but I don't want to
convince everyone that that movie scene is funny.  For me, sure,
yeah, but I don't seek to harsh the mellow of the self-appointed
motivationalists for mankind.  Especially if they're fellow science
fiction writers who are trying to recapture a popular genre's lost
jet-pack propeller-head whirliness.  I understand and sympathize
with the problem there. It's important for a literary tradition to
closely compare itself to previous generations of writers.  We
should earnestly strive for some benchmarks of human sanity.  How
can you know if you're miserable now, if you don't hearken back to
the expressed attitudes of other people at other times, and see how
it is possible for people to feel?   

*Cultural periods have a sensibility.  So does our own cultural
period.  If you lack any understanding of other historical
sensibilities, then you might be innocently happy, but you're a
hick.  Your culture is mere folk-culture. You know very little, you
are a naif.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #105 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:32

    


*I hear that praiseworthy struggle for awareness within the literary
version of the neo-optimist ramble. However, that neo-optimism is
not "mainstream conservatism."  It doesn't really deserve the
dignity of that large, grand label, because it's reactionary, and
not conservative.  It doesn't sincerely claim that we ourselves
should properly be happy at this time, because our situation is
really truly genuinely good now.  It is deceitful: it hearkens back
to earlier standards of more apparent cultural vigor, and it
reproaches us for a present-day bad attitude.

*When you look at the achievements of a genuinely dynamic culture,
this phony boosterism is absent from their scene.  Nobody is
pounding the podium, like these confused or disingenuous
neo-optimists, and telling everybody to cheer up.  Whenever things
are genuinely prosperous, that fake-cheerful rhetoric is entirely
unnecessary to people. People are immersed in the general frenzy of
the forward rush, like they were during, say, the 1990s dot com
boom.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #106 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:32

    

*I enjoyed that 1990s Long Boom quite a lot.  In fact, I went well
out of my way to publicly enjoy it, because I knew it wouldn't last.
And it did not, in fact, last, but while it did, I used to invite
every  wacky lunatic at Austin SXSW over to my house for huge
beer-busts.  We enjoyed that hugely. 

*The tone of WELL State of the World 2016 is quite dark, dank and
sticky, but that's because things are really are, objectively,
statistically, no-kidding, dark, dark and sticky. We cyberpunks can
party when things are good.  Give us a chance: free information,
miniskirts, recreational smart-drugs, extensive credit lines, who
can't like all that.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #107 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:34

    

*People want things to turn out well in the future. It's human:
people tell each other "Good Morning," they don't say "It's another
bleak day where you're on your own!"  

*If you understand human behavior historically, within the broad,
multi-century scale, you can second-guess people; you know that
their gold rushes finish ugly, that every boozy night at the sexy
pick-up bar ends sad for the last ones out the door.  

*For a long time, I wrote speculative, future-oriented science
fiction, and the general reaction was, "Wow, these literary
fantasies are really dark and scary." Were they, in fact, dark, or
just well-researched?  What kind of world do we actually inhabit
during 2016?  It's certainly not the kind of world where perky,
self-satisfied, and confident bourgeois people can properly say, "Oh
well, William Gibson was merely a morbid eccentric."  

*On the contrary, our 2016 is a world where the recently deceased
David Bowie, he who composed the utterly apocalyptic DIAMOND DOGS
album: "Ten thousand people split into small tribes, coveting the
highest of the sterile skyscrapers like packs of dogs assaulting the
glass fronts of Love Me Avenue" (forgive me here, I'm quoting the
deceased poet entirely from memory) -- anyway, David Bowie died, and
people in 02016 are like: "David! Yeah! What an artiste!  A prophet!
Yeah!  Thin White Duke, he was so great!  He sang to millions yet we
heard it within our own hearts!"
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #108 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 00:38

    

*So, RU, to sum up, they are wrong but I forgive them.  I mean that
I forgive the neo-optimists.  I would never presume to forgive
Bowie: he did splendidly; real futurists have children, and Bowie's
son, Duncan Jones, is a major creative figure in 2016.   I follow
Duncan's work with all due care.  I am sorry for Duncan's human loss
this week. My own parents are dead, I understand this tragic aspect
of human experience, though there is never much one can say to cheer
up the bereaved.

*As for the neo-optimists, they're trying to cheer us up, but it
doesn't work on me because I kind of worry about them.  They're not
realists.  They're not teaching us reality, they are obfuscating
reality because, at heart, they are fearful.  If they had any real
answer's to mankind's predicament, they wouldn't wave their cheer-up
banners, they'd shut up and do something useful, large-scale and
effective.

*They won't get that done.  They're not a powerful, influential
group, they're too small scale, and they won't deserve a lot of
attention because they are self-deceitful. So, although I know they
are there, I don't like to beat them up.  That quarrel is not worth
it.  I get their motives, they'll find some small audience: I can't
cruelly deny them their sensibility.  It's like beating up
steampunks because they like top hats.  

*No, worse: it's like beating up Parsees.  An ancient, dogged,
dwindling people, the Parsees.  May their God bless them.  I despise
people who bully the Parsees.  "Zoroaster doesn't exist, you fools!
What about Jesus, Mohammed, Buddha, Moses, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva:
stop worshipping some Ahura-Mazda that no player cares about, and
get in the goddamn ranks!"  Let them be, the Parsees. Of course they
are metaphysically wrong, and in the long term doomed, but who
isn't?  Give them space!  Give them duration!
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #109 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 12 Jan 16 03:22

    
Here's a direct link to Vales's newsletter:

http://www.researchpubs.com/category/newsletter/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #110 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 12 Jan 16 03:24

    
For those of you off Well:

(This asynchronous conversation will continue for two weeks, so
check back every day or two if you find it interesting.)

(Only members of the WELL can post directly to the conversation, but
others can send questions or comments to inkwell at well.com, and
our hosts can post them here.)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #111 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 12 Jan 16 03:54

    
(Slippage)

Classic (bruces) rant, which we all live for here on the WELL. Thank
you RU, for sparking that.

So, Bruce, we are "here", now, we knew chaotic disruption was coming
and in fact many us us were cheering for it, like Country Joe and
the Fish's anthemic "whooppee, we're all gonna die"...but it's not
looking as cool as we might have hoped for after all.

The world-wide governments seem incapable of addressing the real
problems, the money folk seem to just want to ride it out and hope
their space vehicles might be built in time to escape (to
where?)...for the rest of us, bound to the planet, where do we go
from here?

Seems like we need to work up some new paradigms, but will they be
any more successful, or just co-opted by the men in back rooms
smoking cigars and drinking their cognacs at their private clubs and
secure retreats.  Current mantra has been "go local" "sustainable",
yada yada. Not to seem too pessimistic but I don't see how that
changes "Meet the new boss, same as the old boss" routine?

What chances do 'new' paradigms and out of the box thinking have?
How do we break out the us/them box and forge a "we" box...Or is
that naive thinking as well?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #112 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 16 07:37

    
We chuckle and nod and say what a great rant that was, do we really
get it?

If you look through historical cartoons from magazines like the New
Yorker and the Saturday Evening Post, you'll find as one of the
recurring images a bearded guy in a robe on a street corner,
carrying a sign that says something like "Repent - the end is near!"


A guy in a college class I took on "The Question of Authority in
Literature" called _Gravity's Rainbow_ "just another shaggy
apocalypse story," a phrase that stuck with me... dismissive of the
apocalypse, "can't happen here..." 

I was raised on a diet of 50s television, where there was no hint of
apocalypse, no war, no genocide, no real peril, where father knew
best and all the lawns were well-manicured, the order of suburban
America. A naif, as Bruce says. "Heart of Darkness" was, after all,
just a story...

Life in Metropolis, life on Elysium, orderly, clean, manageable... 

It's tempting to dismiss signs of apocalypse, and to grin when you
consider potential human extinction, as though it's just a fiction,
one of many potential paths forward, but always avoidable... always
a happy ending. Once, after a long night of meditative consideration
(and possibly alteration), I watched the sunrise, felt the music
swell within me, watched for the credits... "The End." But nothing
happened. The sun rose, the day was bright, life went on. A bit
frightened that, in fact, life does go on, there's no happy ending,
and then the inevitable - at some point life does NOT go on, but
ends, and the end is ... an unknown. 

After many years of meditation I've matured in my thinking about all
this... about the cycles of life, as sure as you have pleasure
you'll have pain. As sure as you have your life to live, you'll die,
ultimately, and your death will be yours alone... in a sense, you're
alone in the universe. In a sense, you're not you at all, you're
just a bundle of process with an illusory executive, a biological
operating system....

But I digress... I know that human apocalypse is potential, probably
inevitable, as our habitation renders the earth uninhabitable, at
least by this one crazy species. At the moment I see blue sky and
sunshine, but storms are inevitable... 

Anthropogenic climate change presents a problem of coordination, a
requirement for agreement to change whole cultures, ways of life
that have emerged around seemingly boundless sources of energy and
associated uncontrolled spew of by-products, the implications of
which became too slowly clear to the smartest, and are still unclear
to those with less comprehension and foresight.

It's become a political issue, because politics is how we
coordinate. No obvious political solution to a problem that is, to
many of us, so clearly real, and eventually catastrophic. This is
frustrating: we don't have any system of control that will mitigate
the problem with any kind of urgency. We can barely control our
individual selves, really, so why should we think that we can find
the global political will to fix a problem before it is completely
in our face obvious, which will be too late?

I'm not chuckling at Bruce's rant, it's actually chilling.

And I'm not doing enough, are you?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #113 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 16 07:40

    
One thing I *am* doing, with RU Sirius, Krist Novoselic, et al:

http://opensourceparty.net/

"The Open Source Party is a political movement that derives both
inspiration and methods from Open Source software principles. The
fundamental Open Source principles as they apply to this party,
where laws, policies, and political processes are seen as a body of
code, are:

* Transparency: the code, and any changes to the code, are visible
and understandable.

* The code is accessible and modifiable.

* Inclusion: anyone can access the code and propose modifications,
which may be accepted by democratic consensus, or by executive
decision in a framework decided democratically.

As a matter of scope, we limit our activity to the United States but
encourage development of a global Open Source party that creates
models to work in other national contexts.

Our effort is meant have a democratizing transformative effect that
is fair to all. We’re committed to uses of technology to create
platforms that will support our mission."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #114 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 16 07:41

    
It's notoriously difficult to start a political party or movement
and have any real influence or effect, but old ways of thinking
about, and doing, politics are literally killing us.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #115 of 179: Stefan Jones (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 16 08:04

    
Via email from our pal, Stefan Jones:

On my walk home from the supermarket* last night I heard a great
piece on Fresh Air; a contemplation on the word "gig" and the future
of work:

http://www.npr.org/2016/01/11/460698077/goodbye-jobs-hello-gigs-nunbergs-word-
of-the-year-sums-up-a-new-economic-reality

This is relevant to me, because in 2015 the last vestige of Silicon
Valley coolness got sucked out of my job. Stable and good money and
really the kind of thing only utterly impractical romantics walk
away from, but . . . man, I moved out of my parents' basement and
across country in '97 to get rich *and* have fun, and the latter is
in way short supply. It doesn't help that the constant-deadlines of
a DevOps software development happens in the same place where I once
witnessed real crunchy applied computer science and hardware
engineering taking place.

I find myself with the luxury of asking myself what I want to do
next. And deep uncertainty over whether I'm up to the new styles of
employment.


* (My small contribution to green living is walking to the
supermarket. 3.2 miles, round trip, to Fred Meyer. Great way to stay
keep up to date on podcasts. During the summer, free blackberries in
the vacant lots along the way. Hey, maybe free blackberries in the
spring, as the weather keeps weirding.)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #116 of 179: R.U. Sirius (rusirius) Tue 12 Jan 16 10:21

    
Wow. Thanks Bruce for so much response. 
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #117 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 12 Jan 16 13:55

    
(jonl) We're on the same page brother, but if you can't laugh and
find some joy in this horror of a world, what's the point? Yes, it's
a wake up call, it's sobering and apocalyptic and at the same time
hope is embedded in the rant. You can't get to there, if you don't
truly know where you are at the "you are here" spot on your map. 
Bruce nailed it the "now" we're living in, all I was asking is how
and where to next?  You are both futurists, I'm most certainly
not...I can only see that we might make it to 2050 and the time and
space between now and then truly sucks. For me, it's only a question
of are we living above or below the ground. Don't see anything past
that, just possible futures and most of them are bleak. But first we
have to make it to 2050.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #118 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 16 15:04

    
*Signatures of the Anthropocene.

http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-07/welcome-to-the-anthropocene-
five-signs-earth-is-in-a-man-made-epoch
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #119 of 179: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Tue 12 Jan 16 22:05

    <scribbled by julieswn Tue 12 Jan 16 22:31>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #120 of 179: Brian Slesinsky (julieswn) Tue 12 Jan 16 22:31

    


via email from Brian Slesinsky:

So speaking of cheap medical fixes, I'd like to point to some nice
animated maps about malaria in Africa:

https://www.givingwhatwecan.org/post/2015/12/bednets-have-prevented-450-millio
n-
cases-of-malaria/

I wonder if buying hundreds of millions of bednets counts as
"useful,
large-scale and effective." Some scientists have written papers that
say it's working, and I believe them. Does that make me a
neo-optimist?

I keep up with the effective altruism folks and I've sent some money
their way. And it seems like there are other folks who think it's
better than arts funding:

http://www.seattletimes.com/entertainment/with-millennial-philanthropy-money-f
lo
wing-arts-groups-miss-out/

They say that for somewhere around $1k-$2k you can save a
statistical
life. Of course everyone involved knows these are numbers in a
spreadsheet and there are large error bars. But reading scientific
papers and crunching numbers seems fairly reality-based (I hope -
I've
outsourced it to GiveWell).

It's all rather abstract so it doesn't give me warm fuzzies. It's
also
not going to help the refugees in Dadaab or Syria or stop global
warming. Optimizing for economic efficiency tends to avoid the
really
tough problems.

And maybe gene-drive mosquitoes will make all that effort obsolete
someday.

But in the meantime, does anyone have a better idea?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #121 of 179: William Cunningham (julieswn) Tue 12 Jan 16 23:31

    

via email from William Cunningham:

"It's tempting to dismiss signs of apocalypse, and to grin when you
consider potential human extinction, as though it's just a fiction,
one of many potential paths forward, but always avoidable... always
a happy ending."

Avoiding extinction almost never equates to a happy ending though,
and extinction isn't even the likeliest of outcomes of a Cataclysmic
Anthropocene.

I mean, human animals are resilient. We live in every heinous
environment on the surface of the planet and we've demonstrated in
every era that we will do absolutely anything we have to in order to
persist. Aggressive inhospitality on the part of the climate is not
likely to erase us. There may well have been a time some extended
angry weather ground us down to about 40 breeding pairs and some
stragglers, but here we are no in numbers sufficient to allow us to
acidify the whole pacific ocean with our vile seeping civilization.

http://www.npr.org/sections/krulwich/2012/10/22/163397584/how-human-beings-alm
ost-vanished-from-earth-in-70-000-b-c

If climate disruptions perturb the global political and economic
network enough to fragment it a lot of things we think of as our
sophisticated technological civil society will become really, really
difficult to maintain. Nations will get smaller, more selfish and
warlike. Fringe characters with practical traditional knowledge will
become more important. Un-mitigatable disease, death and decay will
be attributed to providence. The time tested standbys of racism,
xenophobia, dominance hierarchies and religion will re-assemble what
was once a global society into the loosely related cells of primate
tribes that haven't ever really left us. 

The scope of human aspiration will phase shift back from yearning
for the Best of All Possible Worlds to hoping for an alliance with
the Best of All Possible Warlords.

We lived a very, very, very long time like that. Most of our time as
a species. It got us through roughly 1.8 million years of
environmental outrages.

That seems to me to be the much more likely apocalypse. Not human
extinction, but the loss of a global consciousness. Planetary brain
damage. Self inflicted.

When people are dismissive of shaggy apocalypse stories I think it
is to some degree because mostly we know this. We know there were a
lot less of us and life was really hard, and we can probably do that
again if we have to. So the idea of us literally wiping ourselves
into extinction seems far fetched.

But I think a lot of people stop there at skepticism and don't think
through the likelier failure scenarios. Especially the super
wealthy. I don't think they have a realistic notion of just exactly
how necessary a global network of trade among relatively stable
political entities is to projects like advanced gerontology, Moore's
Law or even just being a foodie. Every dream of the contemporary
elite will become fantasy when our apocalypse forces us to avoid
extinction the old fashioned way.

Maybe the kids will figure a way around this but I don't really hold
out a lot of hope. Lots of the things I grew up expecting the
population to generationally die out of, the sexism, the racism, the
militarism, they all have just waves of young enthusiasts using the
equalizing miracle of the open internet to find each other and
amplify their influence with no checks on their behavior or growth
that I can see.

I'm personally sort of ok in life right now. Things are pretty good
for me. But I can't imagine it will end well for me even in my own
lifetime and I genuinely can't think what kind of action on my part
could possibly make a difference in this. I guess I'll try to make
sure my nieces have some resources to call on if they get any good
ideas in a decade or two and in the meantime try not to worry?

It's hard to read basically essays in thermodynamic realism and not
want someone smarter than you to offer suggestions as to what to do
about it all that feel like they might plausibly have a positive
effect. Eat local I guess? Practice for when you won't have a
choice?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #122 of 179: Andrew Alden (alden) Wed 13 Jan 16 16:42

    
The Anthropocene concept is crucial. As a deep fan of the geosciences, I've
watched the concept burgeon since its creation. It felt like inside-baseball
stuff, something for geochronologists to wrangle over, and then the public
took it up and turned the Anthropocene into something much more important.
It puts our future into our hands in a wonderfully visceral and focused way.
Even as a minor science writer, I'm feeling like my work means more now. If
it encourages enough of us, in all walks of life, to up our games, then the
Anthropocene idea will do the world much good.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #123 of 179: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Wed 13 Jan 16 17:45

    
Once again I'm left with the feeling that this topic should be
renamed "State of the Developed World".
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #124 of 179: mcc-p (julieswn) Wed 13 Jan 16 20:12

    
We have seen the emergence of online learning and watched it cycle
through to a dispirited realization of its real reach. It seems like
without clear vision this phenomenon directs a restless
self-improvement toward a couple of clear realms: - maybe with new
skill xxx I can get a better job at yyy corporation and/or - I'mna
learn me some new skills, start up one of them startups and cash out
via email from mcc_p:


with a big payday in next to no time. I wonder how the MOOC model
could be used to impart survival skills rather than simply engender
better compensated employees or naify would-be entrepreneurs
expecting to win some kind of VC lottery?  Is there some way to
direct this willingness to expend cognitive processing toward an end
that preferences utility to the race over of improved utility as a
stacks lackey? Perhaps there is something already happening in that
regard? Or, more broadly and saliently which few skills would be
optimally useful to distribute at large accross the population? Any
hope that these systems can change things for the better for their
stakeholders? or just for their founders and shareholders...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #125 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 14 Jan 16 02:32

    
<121> William:

"I'm personally sort of ok in life right now. Things are pretty good
for me. But I can't imagine it will end well for me even in my own
lifetime and I genuinely can't think what kind of action on my part
could possibly make a difference in this. I guess I'll try to make
sure my nieces have some resources to call on if they get any good
ideas in a decade or two and in the meantime try not to worry?"

http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/ John Robb

http://www.openthefuture.com/  Jamais Cascio @cascio

https://t.co/x4ih0X9WgH Cory Doctorow @doctorow

Pebbles in the pond William....think of cyberspace as a pond, think
of your life here on the sphere as making ripples in the sea of
people and places around you....cast your pebbles (thoughts,
actions, posts, love, heart and soul (fill in the blank on
'soul')into the sea...

I know it doesn't seem like much, but as Margaret Mead said: yada, 
yada,
(https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/1071-never-doubt-that-a-small-group-of-though
tful-committed-citizens)

It's a ripple effect....gather local friends, makers,and encourage
resilient people and businesses in your town, village, whatever !

Once in awhile roll a boulder down a hill :) Tsunamis can sometimes
be good. But mostly it's pebbles and you don't see how far they 
extend, how they merge with others, ch, ch, ch changes a la
Blackstar, Mr. Bowie
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #126 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 14 Jan 16 02:33

    <scribbled>
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #127 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 14 Jan 16 02:48

    
<124> Julie, there are so many to choose from, it's almost too much.
I am working with a group trying to change that and put all the
links, resources, tools, platforms, content, and collaborative
networks together:

www.opensourcelearning.net David Preston (who coined the term 'open
source learning')

 https://twitter.com/prestonlearning

Closer to home, there's our own gentles:

(hlr) Howard Rheingold : http://rheingold.com/

(choco) Nancy White :  http://www.fullcirc.com/

(doctorow) Cory Doctorow:
https://boingboing.net/author/cory_doctorow_1

You may want to follow Bryan Alexander @bryanalexander:
http://bryanalexander.org/
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #128 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:04

    
I'd advise easing up on the Apocalypse chatter for WELL SOTW 02016. 
We're pretty likely to be here again next year,  and most of the
large, well-established, long-term grim trends we're complaining
about in 2016 are gonna be some further percentage worse.  So, we've
gotta leave ourselves some wiggle-room for our increased
indignation.  I mean, that is strategic planning at work, okay? 
It's foresight.

What bugs me about the Apocalypse as a besetting vice of futurism is
that, after Apocalypse, nothing is ever surprising.  It's so dull. 
Surprise is the sign that you don't get it.  Admitting that you
don't have all the answers is a healthy sign of intellectual
honesty.  A willingness to ask, test, verify and learn is a sign of
vigor.    

The intellectual problem of Apocalypse arrives when you can't figure
out what will happen after situation (x), and therefore, so you
assume and proclaim that the world must end.  Nothing important ever
happens unless you yourself have it figured out.  How likely is
that?  It's a pre-scientific attitude.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #129 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:05

    

I learned about this issue from H G Wells.  Not his quite good
"Anticipations" material, when he had all his wits around him,  but
from his tragically ludicrous last book. "Mind at the End of Its
Tether."  In this book, the great speculator is  elderly, exhausted,
politically disillusioned, fatally ill and also the Atomic Bomb has
been detonated.   So he's like:  Welp!  That's it!  No More Future! 


For him, yes, that's true.  Personally, he's toast: no more HG
Wells.  And for Wells books, as well: yeah, it's the conclusive last
page of his literary production.  You might even say it's the end of
a historical period Wellsian worldview of Fabian Socialism and
left-wing World Brain activity and scientific labor-unionism and so
on.  

But, mostly, it's just human egotism and frustration talking.  Like:
things didn't go my way, and the threats seem dire and mounting,
and, therefore, there can be no world.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #130 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:05

    

Lately, it's become a vogue to talk about "human extinction events,"
rather than rambling on in time-honored theological form about the
Creator wrapping up his Creation.  That formulation sounds 
impressive and much more up-to-date than a corny Apocalypse.  It
sounds clean and objective, but I wonder.  It still seems
self-centered to me, in the elderly Wellsian way.

There have already been alarming numbers of human extinction events.
Just look at all these dead guys here.  Lots.

http://open.jorum.ac.uk/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10949/918/Items/S182_10_section
4.html

If you're, say, a feline today, you've got all kinds of similar
cat-like cousin species around.  But not us.  Us humans seem to be
critically short of yetis, Bigfeet, hobbits, elves, dwarfs, faerie
folk, saucer-borne Space Brothers, and so forth, despite the fact
that we make them up in fables all the time.  

Chimps, apes, monkeys, lemurs, we've got.  But what happened to all
those other bipedal guys with tools, who could talk?  There used to
be lots of them around.  We've got some genetic bleed over from
them, even: Neanderthals, Denisovans.  

Personally, I'm making the uncharitable guess that the most agile
human species going at the moment disrupted any rival-model humans
and, well, cannibalized them, basically.  I could be wrong, but that
kinda suits our modus operandi.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #131 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:06

    

We never express much public grief about these other "human
extinction events." Not even.  We're not upset about it.  It's like:
they're gone, hahaha, not like us.  You never hear any hand-wringing
or sobbing about the blighted promise of the Neanderthals.  

If the Neanderthals been left alone till now, wouldn't they have
incompetent jetpacks, fast food and financial crises, much like we
do?  I mean, maybe not so good as ours -- their business suits might
need more tailoring -- but the Neanderthals were never mute beasts
of the field.  They weren't static animals stuck in a stable niche
awaiting the inevitable end, they were human planetary wanderers. 
The Neanderthals had weapons, control of fire,  cosmetics, burial
practices, language,  clothing of a sort, some artwork, probably
music, dancing, trail lore, herbal lore, a lot of  advanced
non-animal behaviors.   

So the Neanderthals are a "human extinction event" and we never fret
about that event's supposed importance much.  Seems like a moral
lacuna there, doesn't it?  Shouldn't we hold ourselves up to the
same standards we apply to those other humans, and shrug at the
prospect of our own annihilation, too, and say, "Oh well, we modern
humans just weren't up to the challenge of survival, like those 16
or 17 other extinct primate guys with opposable thumbs"?  

Well, no. Obviously we don't. Because we're HG Wells here.   We're
not all that fretful about "human extinctions" -- what really bugs
is is the ego-centric premise of OUR OWN extinction.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #132 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:07

    


I don’t think that the current version of human beings are at all
likely to go suddenly extinct. The numbers don't add up.  There are
just too many of us to kill all at once.  Unlike Neanderthals, we're
in every biome, we're spread across the planet's surface more
copiously than dandelions and crabgrass.  We've survived at least
one supervolcano event, which are huge disasters probably worse than
the worst plausible nuclear exchange.  Epidemics couldn't kill all
of us because we have some severely isolated human populations, some
of them still in the Stone Age.  

It's plausible that we could suffer a massive population crash and
be plunged into a general Dark Age.  I accept those scenarios as
realistic prospects, but for our huge species to be physically
liquidated to the last man and woman,  I don't see that.  It's
sci-fi melodrama.  It's entertaining to shudder about, but doesn't
make much sense.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #133 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:08

    

One could mournfully counter: oh well it's not over-dramatic "human
extinction" we really worry about, it’s the fall of civilization. 
But, well, other people's civilizations collapse rather a lot.  Here
again I'm  concerned about the Wells amour-propre issue.  

We cherish an exaggerated fear of our own civilization vanishing,
when we don't  shed many crocodile tears about the many others
vanished or vanishing.  For instance, human languages, with all
their deep cultural freight, are vanishing at a staggering clip
right now, but we don't invest a lot of our moral energy trying to
maintain minority language classes.  

What if the Parsees (my favorite ethnic group for 2016) should just
vanish?  Some day there might not be any Parsees.  They were an
entire Persian Zoroastrian "civilization" once.  If we're genuinely
worried about "civilizations" then we ought to be, I dunno, offering
the Parsees free childcare to keep them out of their funereal Tower
of Silence.  Tax breaks, emigration policy, some strokes of the pen
would do it. 

The truth is we're actually keenly worried about our own cozy
situation, and scarcely at all about "civilizations" in general.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #134 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:09

    

You'd think that intellectual honesty would demand a more objective
approach.  If our particular civilization is so frail and haywire
that it's subject to potentially fatal threats every other
Wednesday, maybe we should bend some effort toward phasing it out
and designing a better, more stable civilization.  Of course, that
would require some  heavy sweat-equity, as opposed to glib Doomer
hand-wringing.  But talk is cheap, while genuine efforts at general
reform of a civilization are like the French Revolution, Maoism,
installing the metric system in American schools, and similar
severe, convulsive efforts.  Might not end well!  Might be
tyrannical, even! Why bother?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #135 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:10

    

Talk is cheap, and "Apocalypse" is  talk.  The concept has never
been found in nature. It comes direct from theological speculation
in sacred texts, where you start at the beginning of the text, and
the book says (in its stately MacLuhanesque text-media fashion), 
"Hence it was in the Beginning," and eventually after a lot of human
generations and various local histories, the book ends.  At the end
the linear text states: "hence it will be in the End."   That's
Apocalypse. It's literary.

Books and texts do have strict beginnings and ends, but the book is
never the world.  The map is not the territory, and cannot be.  The
actual world is radically pre-verbal.  The Earth was spinning around
for 4.5 billion years before any words were invented on Earth.  

"In the Beginning was the Word," but that really means that in the
beginning of the BOOK was the Word.   It's a literary device, a
catchy poetic declaration.  The actual beginning of the world
involves many mute aeons of green goo and stromatolites, the
occasional polyp and worm.  They weren't turning pages.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #136 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:10

    

The genuine, non-textual course of world events involves five major
extinctions.  Very severe.  We may be well provoking the sixth one,
an Anthropocene catastrophe.  But  in Wells fashion, we don't really
fret much about those five other catastrophes.  No one cries at the
fate of the dinosaurs at the Cretaceous-Tertiary Boundary Event.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #137 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:11

    

Let me conclude in mentally open-ended fashion by waxing all early
Wells here (all TIME MACHINE, WAR OF THE WORLDS, the awesome
mind-blowing stuff he used to dash out to make the rent, before he
got all geo-strategic).  

Consider  the Anthropocene, very 02016, right?  Posit this.  What if
we discovered that there was another, different Anthropocene, say, a
distant Cretaceous Anthropocene?  Like, a very brief, maybe just 2
or 3 hundred year moment within world geology, where some
intelligent dinosaur civilization burned up all their fuels (yeah,
they had fossil fuels, probably not as much as ours though), and
left some kind of very thin artifact splatter-zone with some molten
plastic conglomerate rocks and the occasional fossilized transistor
radio?

Would we be, like, amazingly shocked by that discovery?  A rival
Anthropocene (maybe a better, bigger Anthropocene than ours)?  I
mean, yeah, they'd surely be our long-lost brothers and sisters
(assuming they reproduced sexually, and that technique was around). 
But would we really take that discovery to our heart?  Would that
revelation cause us to reform any of our contemporary behavior?  
Would it break us out of the self-pitying Wellsian fatal trance of
the 2010s, and open our eyes to the cosmic vistas that used to
dynamize the earlier, more healthy Wells, at a different cultural
period?

For instance: would one single guy shouting Allahu Akbar  in 2016
stop shouting Allahu Akbar if you showed him a fossilized dinosaur
radio?  Would they lay down their arms in East Ukraine, on that
news?  Would the utterly stunning news of an annihilated Earth
civilization  affect the stock market, even?   It would be an
inconvenient truth of major proportions, sure, but I dunno; we've
got our methods for those.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #138 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:13

    

It would be Copernican, basically.  The Copernican discovery was
really, really surprising.  The Apocalypse, never surprising in that
way.   Reality is starkly surprising.  The Apocalypse is dramatic
and emotionally moving, like literature must be.  It's like: game
over, close the book, dust to dust.  

But the world is not a book.  "Who are you gonna believe: this
awesome text, or your lying eyes?"  I'm in the camp of the
experimental philosophy.  Take nothing on mere assertion, and
instead use your senses, and maybe some instruments.  Test the
results, confirm them, spread the news. A lot of stark surprises
there.  It really feels like living.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #139 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:43

    
"In fact it's the only thing that ever has" Ms. Mead.

#138 It really feels like living.

It does indeed Bruce, as probably is the only thing that is. Long
life to you and thanks for all the virtual beers here at the pub we
call Inkwell.vue

Long life, long now to you, Jon and all participating in this SOTW.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #140 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 14 Jan 16 03:47

    
Administrivia:

Only 5 days left, and we are both asychronous and suffering a rather
large time difference between Bruce's European location and Jon's
Texas location...Add to that, that Jon has narrow bandwidth at the
moment.

All to say, please get your questions in TODAY!!! So that Bruce,
Jon, and others have a chance to think them over and respond.

We will keep this topic open for two weeks after it 'officially'
ends, but they tend to taper off quick....so as the quick brown fox
says:

Now is the time for all good people to come to the aid of the SOTW.

The conversation itself will go into the "Archive" and will always
be viewable by anyone, on and off WELL.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #141 of 179: Peter Feltham (oink) Thu 14 Jan 16 04:43

    
Thanks for the interesting discussions - as ever.

Here's a question, or possibly one to throw at the Climate Deniers -
would their heads explode?

Could it actually turn out that the Anthropocene has some benefits?

http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/13/fossil-fuel-burning-postpon
ing-next-ice-age
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #142 of 179: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 14 Jan 16 11:40

    

not a question really nor as grand an observation as most of what has been
recorded here --- but does seem state of the world, 2016 (and maybe touches
tangentially about current notions about art, cultural creation, and the
value place on them):

- front page of the financial times the day after david bowie died was about
his pioneering bowie bonds, which were originally a clever way for an artist
to get $ now for future projects. however, by the 2000s, piracy had driven
the status of the bonds into junk status.

- yet who is doing well, with a different way of trading in performance +
sexuality, in 2016? the kardashians.

apocalyptic in its way...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #143 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 16 12:12

    
I'm offline quite a bit the next couple of days, but here's a quick
one...

Sure, apocalypse is metaphor, much of what we imagine is
poorly-outlined shadow of reality anyway. 

I suppose we don't moan about the extinction of neanderthals because
we don't assume they became extinct; rather, through some chain of
missing links, they evolved into contemporary homo sapiens. Humans,
all species, are still evolving, just as some species are at
terminal points. I suppose evolution is a form of extinction, an end
is also a beginning.

I admit to being "keenly worried about our own cozy situation," but
impermanence is the rule. Ask the Buddha: when we suffer, it's
because we don't have a clear relationship with the impermanence of
all things. We suffer was we resist inevitable change.

"If our particular civilization is so frail and haywire that it's
subject to potentially fatal threats every other Wednesday, maybe we
should bend some effort toward phasing it out and designing a
better, more stable civilization."

Now you're talking!  Let's evolve past our imperfections, become
imperfect in new and better ways. 

The anthropocene doesn't have to be dark, we have plenty of halogen,
LED, fluorescent, incandescent light bulbs to burn away the gloom.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #144 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 16 15:26

    
<loris>: ++
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #145 of 179: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 14 Jan 16 16:05

    
is ++ = Like (tm)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #146 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 16 20:52

    
Yes, indeed!

From Wikipedia, re. Bowie Bonds:

"Bowie's combined catalog of albums covered by this agreement sold
more than 1 million copies annually at the time of the agreement.
However, by March 2004, Moody's Investors Service lowered the bonds
from an A3 rating (the seventh highest rating) to Baa3, one notch
above junk status. The downgrade was prompted by lower-than-expected
revenue "due to weakness in sales for recorded music" and that an
unnamed company guaranteed the issue.

"The Bowie bonds liquidated in 2007 as originally planned, without
default, and the rights to the income from the songs reverted to
Bowie."

That whole Wikipedia articlel is interesting:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celebrity_bond
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #147 of 179: Alex Tarkowski (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 16 05:07

    
Via email from Alex Tarkowski:

The landscape of the Internet Counterrevolution is indeed quite
bleak. Do you see any reason to still see hope regarding the
positive, transformative power of the internet? Is there anything
that’s a counterbalance to trolls, cyberwarfare, surveillance and
corporate domination?

And on a related note, what do you make of blockchain? Quite a lot
of people in tech (including activist) circles seem to be excited
about it, due to its distributed nature. At the same time, the
technology itself seems to be shaped by a heavily libertarian
mindset.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #148 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 16 06:33

    
I'm not a major blockchain fan, not because it doesn't work, but
because  ultra-libertarian hackers can't solve a nest of
institutions like finance with plug-and-play crypto solutionism. 
Bitcoin plummeted from the mathematical noosphere into an
all-too-human snake-pit of fraud, trolling, censorship, palace
intrigue and Chinese nationalist fire-walling.

The Bitcoin veteran here may not be entirely, mathematically
accurate in his glum analysis of what went on with Bitcoin in real
life.  He may well be lying, special-pleading, backstabbing his many
enemies and also deceiving himself.  However, that behavior is not
"part of the problem."   The human element actually is the Bitcoin
problem.  

https://medium.com/@octskyward/the-resolution-of-the-bitcoin-experiment-dabb30
201f7#.8fhy0mabx
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #149 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 16 06:51

    
Via email from Alex Tarkowski:

The landscape of the Internet Counterrevolution is indeed quite
bleak. Do you see any reason to still see hope regarding the
positive, transformative power of the internet? Is there anything
that’s a counterbalance to trolls, cyberwarfare, surveillance and
corporate domination?

*It's not all bleak.  The Internet had a pretty good run as major
technologies go.  It had and still has plenty of transformative
power, it's just than no form of technical power can be entirely
"positive" or permanently "positive." I would rank Internet with
major advents like electrification, national highways, mass
production, aviation and so on.  They're important but they're not
the be-all and end-all.

*If you were to ask, "is there a reason to still see hope in the
positive, transformative power of electrification," well, it would
just sound odd.  "Hope?"  What about?  It's a fact on the ground.

*Very few of us want to give up our light switches, but the coal
plants that fire up those electrical nets are very dangerous. 
Nuclear power, no picnic either.  But it's not that electricity is
bleak of hopeless.  Change continues, there is LED, solar, wind,
smart thermostats, giant Elon Musk batteries in the basement, all
kinds of activity in electrification.  The only change is one of
historical experience; we're used to electricity now, and we don't
demand utopia from it.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #150 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 16 06:54

    

*Trolls, cyberwarfare, surveillance and corporate domination are all
just as subject to the passage of times more "positive" aspects of
modernity.  Trolls are loathed already.  Cyberwarfare will evolve in
the tricky ways that other forms of operations-other-than-war will
evolve. Surveillance doesn't solve the problems that spies think it
will solve, and creates periodic crises; for instance, the American
fondness for the NSA may have cost the US global control of the
Internet. For what actual strategic benefit?  Where is the payoff
for all that spying?
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #151 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 16 06:55

    

As for corporate dominance, it's quite old-fashioned.  What actually
dominates now is stockholder value and a few ultra-rich individuals;
finance defeated corporate power many years ago.  We have oligarch
dominance, not corporate dominance.  Otherwise, Donald Trump would
be insulting and trolling corporations instead of individuals.  The
Koch Brothers wouldn't be hated, feared and respected, we'd hate
their front corporations instead.  People don't do that now. 
Mistaking the Koch Bros for one of their corporate fronts would be
naive and corny.

Our problems an downsides will become old-fashioned too.  Not that
things will become more positive.  Just, things get old-fashioned,
across the board.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #152 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 16 07:06

    
*An interesting suggestion from four years ago that seemingly flat
and equal peer-to-peer networks, such as Internet and Bitcoin,
actually breed oligarch elitism.

http://blog.dshr.org/2014/10/economies-of-scale-in-peer-to-peer.html

*It was often argued in previous centuries that democracy without
republican institutions led to tyranny.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #153 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 16 07:24

    
In the end, it's a math problem.
http://blogs.ams.org/phdplus/2012/11/01/the-mathematics-of-democracy/#sthash.l
44PfFv1.dpbs

I moderated a conference discussion a couple of days ago. The
question was whether technology could turbocharge democracy. The
obvious questions all emerged: is a Republic such as ours a
"democracy"? what's the best way to make participatory decisions?
how easy is it to game the system? etc. Does gerrymandering subvert
democracy? Does propaganda shape the vote so that democracy is only
apparent? Is a low-participation vote democratic, or is it just a
ritual of affirmation? 

Everyone seems to agree that we're in a real mess, but it's unclear
what combination of energy and intelligence (and power) would clean
it up; is it cleanable? Was it cleaner/better before? 

Has technology actually undermined democratic principles, e.g. by
facilitating the spread of propaganda and disinformation?

I think that last post <bruces> linked is insightful, clearly the
problems of democracy, like the problems of p2p networks, are
associated with scale and diversity.

It's hard to sustain a state the size of the USA, let alone sustain
it as a democracy. But we don't exactly do that: we're not a
monolithic entity governed centrally, but a collection of states
with state governments, and those state "unite," ideally co-operate,
as a federated set, seeking the advantages of scale and
co-operation. When I worked in state government, we talked a lot
about our Federal partners - the states are in partnership with the
federal government, and through that partnership, they're
co-operating with each other. 

Question is, where do the authority and rights of the state end, vs
the authority and rights of the federation?

We hear about states' rights, but we probably don't have enough
conversation or intelligence about that division of responsibility
and accountability.

And the rest of the world is still at various levels of Figuring It
Out.

When I step back, I think, globally, the question we should all ask
ourselves is about where we should be competing, and where we should
be co-operating...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #154 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 16 07:26

    
(A political scientist, reading that, would probably shake his head
and say, "that's simplistic, it's a LOT more complicated"...)
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #155 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 16 09:50

    
*I'm currently in Munich Germany at their local Maker Faire, which
is a rather standard Maker culture event except that the city's
government has rather a prominent presence there.

*I opined that the "flat world" Internet theory where everybody was
on a level electronic playing field is over for the time being. 
We're into an Internet Counterrevolution period of balkanization,
wall-building, silos and centers of regional ambition.

*In the meantime, shabby, cheesy Little Britain has kindly offered
to expel immigrants who make less than L35K a year.  Are they a
nation or an AirBnB?

http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-urged-to-rethink-new
-35000-earnings-threshold-for-non-eu-migrants-as-teachers-face-a6814841.html
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #156 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 16 09:53

    
*Glum, tormented, spiteful Canada now officially hip for 2016! 
Welcome back, Canada, all is forgiven!

http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/01/15/style/canada-justin-trudeau-cool
.html
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #157 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 16 08:41

    
*Off to play some techno music in a Munich nightclub and dedicating
my set to the memory of Countess Franziska du Reventlow.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #158 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 18 Jan 16 02:47

    
Nice...Bruce, Europe has always had a long history of 'salons'...are
there any still going on, do people spark ideas face to face
anymore? Or has digital killed that off?

There is something about food, drink, and the chemistry of dialog
all in the same physical space that doesn't seem able to be
replicated in cyberspace. Maybe VR will change that, but I doubt it.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #159 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 16 04:11

    
http://brucesterling.tumblr.com/post/137539537838/dedicating-my-munich-techno-
dj-set-to-the-memory

*There's the playlist for you fans of hole-in-the-wall DJ sets in
ex-industrial "creative quarter" areas of big European cities.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #160 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 18 Jan 16 04:37

    
Thx, good Gopod, I'm feeling old, only know of two of those groups
:(
So much to do, so much to do....(Dave Matthews)

Bruce, how's your career Bollywood quest going? Anyone new,
observatons of its continued cultural impact.   New music you are
excited about. Have you heard King Krule, my particular new fav:

https://www.youtube.com/user/kingkrulevideo
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #161 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 16 07:16

    
Thanks for the playlist! I programmed it in Spotify, listening now.
Streaming music makes me happy as a clam.

Today's the last day of our discussion... we should load the
soundtrack on the front end next year.

Tonight I'm giving a talk at EFF-Austin, "Agoratopia," the latest in
my series of "Future of the Internet" talks. I wanted to give a more
focused talk - the one I'd been giving is about half history and
half speculation; it's always tempting to wax nostalgic about the
history, which leaves less time for the "future of" speculation. One
version of the talk, for an IEEE consultants' group, never got past
the history, we had a great time remembering our experiences with
Gopher, Archie & Veronica, Usenet newsgroups, etc. 

"Agoratopia" is about the Internet as a marketplace. After
struggling to weld that onto the existing framework of the talk, I
woke this morning with the outline for a pretty-much-from-scratch
new version that talks about what we have, and what we (should)
want, if we assume that we're okay with "the agora" - where the
market is built into the public gathering-place in some ideal,
non-obnoxious way...

Off to make the slides...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #162 of 179: disclaimers and disentanglements at gailwilliams.com (gail) Mon 18 Jan 16 11:44

    

Looking forward to seeing the slides, Jon.  Mostly concerned about
restrictions and contortions of the agora of ideas, but the agora of
products seems more and more tied in. And of course the nautual
planet is the platform for all the platforms, and that future is not
absolute, but complex and nuanced.  

You said something earlier about "too late" for our atmosphere, but
if you look at the calculated projections for late response to the
challenge (now, pretty much) versus later or none, there are
powerful reasons not to be fatalistic about climate change
mitigation. I'm still thinking about the first few days of the topic
here.  That listicle you shrugged at probably lists the most
influential thing you can do first.  That's to not eat meat, of
course. You don't have to sumpathize with animal abuse or adopt a
buddhist tradition, just scientifically choose to skip the meat, and
don't be derisive when somebody asks for the salad without bacon. 
Each time you select vegetable proteins instead of meat you buy our
planet some time. Well, the biosphere anyway.  Cause geology doesn't
care about biodiveristy or the agora of the future and how it will
be powered. Imperfect gestures are better than none.  (I don't talk
about this very much partly because I do eat dairy, and I know that
is part of the problem, but even a grilled cheese sandwich instead
of a cheeseburger is a meaningful vote for a liveable planet.)  I
hang out a lot with craft beer community people, and young American
brewers with their beards and shorts and can-do spirit tend to be
extremem meat fetishists, so I think about this a lot and say very
little. Such a coward.   

Thanks for the insights into Europe and the world, Bruce. I guess
it's kind of obvious to say that your posts pop because of your
facility with the language, but damn they can be pleasant as well as
informative and disturbing.  

So here's a pebble into the stream.  Best thing I learned this year
was about antibiotic-resistant staph infections foiled by early
Anglo-Saxon medicine derieved from an old manuscript called Bald's
Leechbook. Mostly motivated by the fun of experimentation.

I think one reason I love the story is that I love how citizen
science is back, after being a curioisty of earlier centuries.  

There are some articles around that tell this story, about a
microbiologist who did historical battle reenactments for fun -- not
US Civil War, but Viking/Anglo-Saxon battles -- and who became
friends with an historian who had an amateur interest in
epidemiology... and how they proceeded to test old remedies, and
detemined that they could beat MRSA with a formula including garlic
and ox bile.  

But some of those articles draw dumb conclusions.  The story is even
better in more depth.

The Radiolab version is thorough, charming, amusing and asks all the
right questions.   http://www.radiolab.org/story/best-medicine/   
A few months old, but if you missed it, grab it.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #163 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 18 Jan 16 14:32

    
This is our last 'official' day, I would like to thank Bruce and Jon
for their extraordinary generosity of time and knowledge, for
sharing so much 'spot on' content, wishing you both the most joyous
and productive year ahead in all your endeavors.

To everyone participating, on WELL and off WELL, thank you for your
inputs, questions, lurkings, etc. This has been one of the best
SOTW's, Not that they aren't all great, but we all mostly we able to
stay out of Bruce and Jon's way and let them post as they wished and
answer your questions as they felt so inclined.

To all who helped in the production of this year's conversation:
Brady, Gail, et.al.  Thanks for being present behind the stage and
making it all go so smoothly.

This conversation will always be available in the Archives, to on
WELL and OFF WELL folks alike....

If you have further questions or comments, please feel free to ask
or make them...Bruce and Jon will occassionally check in to the
topic during the next two weeks, then we will archive it.

Next up, Jon Lebkowsky will begin a two week conversation with Sarah
Hepola:

http://sarahhepola.com/

Feel free to hang around for that one as well, should it interest
you.

All the best to you and yours, enjoy

Ted
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #164 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 16 15:09

    
Thanks, Ted! And thanks to everybody who dropped by, and especially
to all who contributed comments and questions...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #165 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:39

    
Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 18 Jan 2016 (02:47 AM)

"Nice...Bruce, Europe has always had a long history of
'salons'...are
there any still going on, do people spark ideas face to face
anymore? Or has digital killed that off?

"There is something about food, drink, and the chemistry of dialog
all in the same physical space that doesn't seem able to be
replicated in cyberspace. Maybe VR will change that, but I doubt
it."

*I appreciate Ted's insight and, yes, I think there's something to
the face-to-face issue.  I've noticed that, while social media
destroyed the economic underpinnings of paper media, events somehow
became the new magazines.  

*In 2015 I went to events about as often as I used to write a
magazine article, back during the  last 20th century.   I also wrote
a few magazine articles during 2015, but about as often as I used to
go to public events in, say, 1987.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #166 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:39

    

*Why is it happening -- events, not magazines?  Because the physical
presence of people can still be monetized.  People need each other. 
I'm pretty sure that the lasting success of SXSW Interactive has
plenty to do with the fact that women abound there -- at least, for
a tech event.  SXSW is a geek romance scene.

*So, let's assume that European salons indeed have some legs in
2016.   How would you test that idea out?  Well, that's what we have
tried here in Torino (for indeed I am in Turin now, for 24 hours at
least).  

*We built a home that is entirely dedicated to the local Torino Fab
Lab.  
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #167 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:40

    

*If you think about it, a "fab lab" is a kind of "salon" for digital
production machinery.  You may own saws, a lathe, 3DPrinters, but
you need a community to gather over the tools.  That requires human
presence, got a host or hostess, the "mistress of the salon" who
keeps the lights on and oils the machineries of collaborative social
networking.

*There are now over 30 Fab Labs in various corners of Italy.  Torino
had the first Italian Fab Lab.   Now it's got the first *residency"
in a Fab Lab anywhere to my knowledge.  It's called "Casa Jasmina."

http://casajasmina.arduino.cc

*Massimo Banzi of Arduino/Genuino named Casa Jasmina after Jasmina
Tesanovic (my wife) because Jasmina is more or less the "mistress of
the salon" within this Maker Culture enterprise.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #168 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:40

    

*It took us quite a while to get the place up and running, because
lofting out a house inside a derelict European factory is no picnic.


https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/albums/72157647536440143

*But, eventually, we managed.  So, in 2016, Casa Jasmina has
heating, lighting, plumbing, a kitchen, pantry, rather a lot of odd
Maker furniture, broadband, 3DPrinters next door, a big robot
downstairs and other necessities of modern life.  People from the
Maker scene are, in fact, residing in Casa Jasmina, on occasion.  We
even have an AirBnB account and could rent the place out if we felt
like it.

*It's an open question if you could start a "salon" in a private
home and have that really work in 2016.  But Casa Jasmina is not a
private home, it just closely resembles one, and it's not a classic
European culture salon, it's a European technoculture salon.  In
reality, Casa Jasmina is a crypto-domestic space within a huge
ex-factory also occupied by a Fab Lab, an open-source electronics
company, a printing house and a rather large rent-and-share complex
for designers, "Toolbox CoWorking."  Therefore the "Casa" is a kind
of club-house, a domestic front-scene, or even a promotional
billboard of sorts, for its busy sister enterprises within a
Turinese post-industrial setting.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #169 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:41

    

*The interesting and important aspect is that the social mood of
this factory complex definitely changes within the context of
"house."  People simply change their behavior, because of the polite
domestic cues around them.  They can't help it.  They talk
differently; they act differently.

*You walk in the house, and it's not a factory; there are artworks
on the walls, ambient theme music plays.  There's a private library
with interesting books on widely assorted cultural topics.  It
smells like fresh coffee and Piedmontese food.  Somebody took some
trouble with the paint job.  

There's even a specialized kid's room, where the entirely fictional
children of Casa Jasmina pretend to live.  Once inside the Casa
Jasmina venue, people go all un-businesslike, quite suddenly.  They
stop trying to make-their-numbers and, instead, relax and let their
hair down.  It's still a Maker house, but instead of being all about
Maker websites and Maker instruction manuals, suddenly it's about
Maker Culture.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #170 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:42

    


*People in other European cities seem to like this idea.  We just
got back from explaining it at a Maker Faire in Munich, where the
locals are simpatico.  It wouldn't surprise me if other open-source
residencies show up soon in other cities, because Europe is  overrun
with derelict industrial zones that have been clumsily transformed
into "creative quarters."  

*Also, it's logically and culturally consistent.  As Jasmina pointed
out in the Fab Lab two years ago, if you're a Maker into open source
hardware and software, and you boldly claim that you have the
capacity to "make" all kinds of cool stuff, then why don't you
"make" something that people in Europe really need: a place to live?

*It's a provocative concept, and it's gathering attention from
groups that we knew nothing about.  It's not proven successful yet,
but I'm thinking that 2016 will be quite a strong year for this
effort, and we'll be quite busy at it.  We'll be hosting students,
seminars, cultural events; in the salon of Casa Jasmina, we seem to
have a lot of new friends in 2016 that we didn't know we had.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #171 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 19 Jan 16 05:54

    
Also, Bruce and Jasmina will be talking about Casa Jasmina at SXSW 
Interactive, in March... 
http://schedule.sxsw.com/2016/events/event_PP49446
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #172 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 11:38

    
"“We act as though comfort and luxury were the chief requirements of
life, when all that we need to make us really happy is something to
be enthusiastic about.”  &#8213; Charles Kingsley. He was a career
Christian functionary, but a devotee of Charles Darwin.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Kingsley
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #173 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 12:32

    
*Pretty much what I said on the Well here, but I've got a microphone
on my hand and I am staring into the startled face of Spaniards
whose first language isn't English.

https://youtu.be/ZTj3NeeIGo0
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #174 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 19 Jan 16 13:01

    
"... a European Union internal cultural export..."
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #175 of 179: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 19 Jan 16 23:34

    
You never know what fate will hand you.  Hope to be back here next
year.    Now, I've got to catch a train.
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #176 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 20 Jan 16 08:36

    
Already looking forward...
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #177 of 179: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 21 Jan 16 04:41

    
A great year, exceeding all expectations, to you and yours
boys...travel safe
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #178 of 179: James Ford (julieswn) Thu 21 Jan 16 23:05

    
Via email from James Ford:

Thank you again Bruce and Jon.

As an American ex-pat currently living in Munich (second time living
abroad, the first ex-pat experience was in Paraguay), I am glad to
know there are more like minded people about this part of the world.
If my wife and I weren't about to have our second child we would
have loved to see you at the Maker Faire, but as it is maybe we'll
have to help populate the children area of Casa Jasmina in the near
future.Warm Regards
  

inkwell.vue.487 : Bruce Sterling & Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2016
permalink #179 of 179: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 27 Jan 16 06:21

    
Was I too apocalyptic this year? I thought perhaps then read this:
http://paleofuture.gizmodo.com/the-doomsday-clock-remains-at-3-minutes-to-midn
ight-bu-1755197282

The "Doomsday Clock" is at three minutes to midnight, and here's
what they say we have to do about it:

* Dramatically reduce proposed spending on nuclear weapons
modernization programs.

* Re-energize the disarmament process, with a focus on results.

* Engage North Korea to reduce nuclear risks.

* Follow up on the Paris accord with actions that sharply reduce
greenhouse gas emissions and fulfill the Paris promise of keeping
warming below 2 degrees Celsius.

* Deal now with the commercial nuclear waste problem.

* Create institutions specifically assigned to explore and address
potentially catastrophic misuses of new technologies.
  

