inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #0 of 198: Welcome to the WELL (jonl) Thu 29 Dec 16 09:48

    
We're kicking off the 2017 edition of the state of the world
conversation with Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky. The WELL has
hosted this conversation every year since 2000. It's a free-ranging
discussion of anything and everything across the worlds of
technology, design, politics, high and low culture, fashion - pretty
much anything goes.

Bruce Sterling is a world-famous author, thinker, and bon vivant. He
has a global perspective, as someone who travels and reports
broadly. In addition to his writing, he is widely known as a
speaker, teacher and maker attentive to trends in science, culture,
politics, and design.

Jon Lebkowsky has been making and sharing experiences in digital
culture and media for over 25 years. He's been an activist,
sometimes journalist, and blogger who writes about the future of the
Internet, digital culture, media, and society.

The conversation will continue for two weeks, so be sure to bookmark
it and keep checking back for more commentary, insight, and crazy
wisdom...
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #1 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 30 Dec 16 07:36

    
Stephen Hawking summarized one aspect of the state of the world
pretty handily in a Guardian op-ed, "This is the most dangerous time
for our planet." The tagline: "We can’t go on ignoring inequality,
because we have the means to destroy our world but not to escape
it."  He says globalization and automation "will accelerate the
already widening economic inequality around the world," and that
owing to the spread of the Internet and social media, "the stark
nature of these inequalities is far more apparent than it has been
in the past.... the lives of the richest people in the most
prosperous parts of the world are agonisingly visible to anyone,
however poor, who has access to a phone." It's no wonder, he says,
that there's a reaction against elites, and a against systems that
seem to benefit the rich at the expense of the not-rich. The elites,
he says, should acknowledge this, and suggests that elites should
not "reject these (Brexit, Trump) votes as outpourings of crude
populism that fail to take account of the facts, and attempt to
circumvent or circumscribe the choices that they represent..."
[https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/stephen-hawking-dangerou
s-time-planet-inequality]

It's ironic that a member of the billionaire elite had the right
voice to speak to populist discontent in the USA, winning the
presidency with the political equivalent of a TKO. This win was just
another piece in a global jigsaw puzzle, assembling the future based
on anger and rejection, not based on vision, science, reason or
comprehension. 

Dangerous, yes, and complex. 

Many pieces of the puzzle are still in the box, out of site. I can't
pretend to have scenarios for the future to propose with any level
of confidence. However, like Hawking, I'm an optimist. I don't
believe we're going to reach meltdown. Maybe, as Rex Tillerson said
of climate change, the difficult current state of the world is "an
engineering problem, and it has engineering solutions." If so,
perhaps we should work at getting past the anger and confusion, and
think like engineers, problem-solvers looking for innovative
solutions.

In my own tiny life, I try to address the problem of inequality by
supporting worker-owned cooperative businesses. In the USA, we have
argued that we are the world's leading democracy, yet most business
enterprises here are structured as oligarchies. It should be no
surprise that we see a political drift here away from equality and
toward oligarchic authoritarianism in that case. How can we expect
equality, when we aggressively enforce inequality in our most
prominent organizational structures? In a worker-owned co-operative,
the workplace is relatively democratic, all workers participate in
governance and share in profit. Everyone has a stake, and everyone
can be part of consensus governance. This works pretty well in
smaller clusters, but democracy doesn't scale well as a process for
making decisions. That's a problem worth confronting head-on; a
problem of engineering effective and fair governance. Is there an
engineering solution?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #2 of 198: someone who just sucked on a dill pickle (wendyg) Fri 30 Dec 16 15:31

    
The thing is, the "elites" who get hammered aren't so muchh the actual
elites as the people in the middle who have a few advantages but aren't the
ones doing the damage. In the UK, they changed a bunch of tax rules in order
to soak expatriates, who are viewed as rich. The result was to triple
accountants' costs for peop like me, who *aren't* possessed of the kind of
wealth that makes a difference to the tax coffers, while the actual rich
bypassed all that  by paying a flat fee or moving away again.

wg
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #3 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:20

    
Back again for another twenty-first century edition of the WELL
State of the World!  Who's gonna collapse first:  us pundits, or
"the World"?

On the face of it, this is the worst condition the SOTW's world has
ever yet been found in.  I do hesitate to bluntly state that,
because whenever you tell Americans a harsh truth nowadays, instead
of pragmatically taking some hands-on action to cash in (as was once
their wont) nowadays they tend to empty a bottle of Oxycontin and
float out on a paisley tide of weltschmertz.

I don't intend to mince a lot of words here, as that is not our
tradition,  but I would start by strongly urging you prize your
existence in 2017. Life is precious and shouid be valued, for it's
easy not to have it.   Besides, despair is an act of intellectual
arrogance.  Despair implies that you've got it all figured out,
while the only sure thing about 2017 is a forthcoming boatload of
unheard-of surprises.

Although everybody expressed shock and surprise at world events
during 2016, I saw little evidence that anybody actually changed
their mind much yet.  Scarcely anybody broke a filter-bubble;
positions simply hardened all around.  

You'd think that having your 2015 weltanschaaung reduced to 2016's
gonzo cartoon-status would cause everybody to undergo some healthy 
reassessment of ground-state reality.  But, no.  Nowadays, that
sends confirmation-bias into overdrive.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #4 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:23

    <hidden>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #5 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:24

    

So, in thinking back over  my own 2016, which was one of the
weirdest years of my extensive lifespan, I wondered if I myself had
changed my mind about anything.  Were there any shocking facts I had
stumbled over that had disarranged my long-established prejudices? 
Was there a situation where I thought, "You know, I believed (X) for
thirty years or more, but in today's perturbed situation, I can see
that I should no longer believe (X), and henceforth I will purport
myself differently!"

Maybe.  Sort of.  But it wasn't facts or reason that convinced me. 
Instead, I found that a new sensibility that had crept up on me. 
I'll tell that story here, although, admittedly, it may seem a tad
morbid.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #6 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:25

    
t's a story of sudden unexpected death.  Specifically, the
assassination last December of the Russian ambassador to Turkey,
Andrei Karlov.  The assassination of an ambassador is commonly seen
as a large and awful business.   World-scale dread ensued when that
diplomatic was blown away on video, dramatically riddled with
bullets by a cop who was trained to shoot and didn't miss.  

Dread ensued for a news cycle or two, maybe 48 hours.  A common
hot-take on this geopolitical incident was that a new Sarajevo had
occurred.  World War III might be at hand, etc.  

Then the shooting of Karlov gently faded into the background noise. 
On New Years Eve some ISIS guy in Turkey staged a nightclub
slaughterhouse that was  39 times as gruesome, so Karlov's brief
fame as a terror icon evaporated from the networks.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #7 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:29

    
But in reading about Karlov's demise, and watching the numerous
jpegs and videos of the shooting (because they were all over the
place), I realized that I was having a strange and novel emotional
reaction.    One I'd never felt before.

I felt a kind of genuine and rueful affection for the guy.  As if we
were on a first-name basis, and he'd slipped and fallen on an icy
sidewalk that presented a danger to anybody.  "So, it's come to
this, has it Andrei?" I wanted to say.

That feeling wasn't grief, fear, indignant alarm, least of all was
it "terror."  It wasn't even pity or sorrow; no, it was a kind of
genteel intimacy, as if I'd told him over a cocktail glass: Well,
that's a bad break for you, Andrei, but that's how it is for all of
us nowadays.  It wasn't me this time, but, well, I get where you're
coming from.

I think my reaction came to me because that killing took place in an
art gallery.  Since I hang out in Europe, I've personally seen about
a zillion of those well-meaning cross-cultural exhibits in various
art galleries.  In the case of the Karlov killing, it was a public
show of pretty photos of the Russian countryside.  Typical.

I wouldn't jump out of my chair to see an anodyne exhibit like that,
but it's plausible that I would show up in such a situation. 
Because nobody looks at the art at these shows, except for Grandma
and the 11-year-olds.  Events like Andrei's are all about
state-supported culture industry guys gossiping over the cheese and
crackers.  Sometimes I meet guys like that.

Also, Ambassador Karlov and I were two months apart in age. 
Contemporaries, really, me and this portly, bespectacled, dignified
apparatchik who was blown away at his podium while trying to say
something to the local foreigners that sounded civilized.

I never met Andrei Karlov, but I've met other people rather like
him, so I think I know how that encounter would have worked.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #8 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 03:34

    

Something like this: "So, Mr Ambassador, congratulations on your
photography show."

Then he would have replied in lightly accented global-diplomat
English, "Thank you for coming, where did you come from?"  I would
have said, "I'm from Texas, but I've been to Moscow and Petersburg.
I met some Russian artists there," and then he would have said --
lowering his voice half an octave -- "Oh yes, Texas. I've been to
Houston. They have space rockets there," and that would have been
that. 

If you happen to lock eyes with a power-broker guy like that, the
subtext is something like: Fine, keep your nose clean, I've got your
number now.  That's how they are.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #9 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 06:45

    

And I wouldn't have minded it.  I wouldn't expect a well-suited
official representative of a foreign power to behave any
differently.  
 It's a bit creepy, because there's always a whiff of spook intrigue
around diplomats, but it would have been cordial and normalizing. 
It wouldn't concern me that Andrei Karlov and I were not destined to
be good buddies.  

On the contrary, I'd get gravely alarmed if a Russian ambassador got
all cozy with me:   "Wow! Is it really you??  Aren't you the famous
Bruce Sterling, who used to write about Russia for WIRED?  I love
your sci-fi novels!  How about writing a little something topical
for 'Sputnik' or 'Russia Today'?  We've got girls and vodka!"

That would be disturbing.  I'm thinking that journalistic colleagues
(especially European ones) are gonna see rising levels of that
behavior in 2017, because, given events of 2016, how could they not?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #10 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 06:46

    
But that wouldn't have changed my reaction to Karlov's sad tale,
because, frankly, all of that has been factored in by now.  It's not
that I'm overlooking the geopolitical aspects of the event, or that
I'm blinded by sentimentality because some guy got killed.  Nope, I
get it about  Aleppo, the war in Syria, the barrel bombs, the
Russian special forces creeping in from Ukraine, the ethnic
cleansing, the disaffected 22 year old cop who turns his own gun on
his masters because of some fit of political rage that he judged was
worth his own life.

So it's not like some peace-and-brotherhood riff that I'm espousing
here, more  of a human recognition that we share the same lifeboat. 


Andrei Karlov wasn't a person one would much need to pity.  To judge
by his CV, he was a capable career guy.  He spent most of his
diplomatic career in North Korea, probably persuading  them not to
randomly incinerate the neighbors.  When Karlov got sent to Turkey
three years ago -- obviously well aware of the bloody mayhem in
Syria and the sky-high stakes of the bold Russian offshored military
adventure there -- he must have been pleased and proud of the
confidence invested in him. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #11 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 17 07:45

    
I had my own, personal, familial experience of death toward the end
of 2016, and it did change my thinking, really struck like lighting
at the core of my self-perception.  It was an "everything you know
is wrong" moment - overwhelming the usual ego-experience, exposing
the fragility of personality and the impermanence of life - more
than that, the impermanence of everything. As someone drawn to
Buddhism I've meditated on impermanence and emptiness for many
years, but a sudden untimely death brings it home, you can feel that
sense of impermanence deep in your bones. And your life just shrinks
into a new understanding, how tiny you are, and how ephemeral.

In October we visited Rocky Mountain National Park and its elk. When
we arrived we found elks in rut, a bull elk protecting his harem
from an invading bull, squawking (the reality of "majestic bugling")
bugling and scraping his antlers. They faced off at one point but
didn't lock horns. I'd seen a similar dance two decades before. In
that moment the life of the bull elk is all assertion of dominance -
his life and his world resolve as that moment, in that place of
defense for the protector, offense for the invader. Ego is like
that, assertion and dominance, protecting the fragile internal life
we all experience as bundled with, and to great extent driven by,
the kieshas: anxiety, fear, anger, jealousy, depression etc. 
Brittle walls built around our experience, guards at the gates, a
deep moat surrounding.

Early morning October 23, our sixteen-year-old grandson Carson's
heart stopped, and he died in his sleep.  We live nearby, had an
urgent call from our son, his father, to come quickly, there were no
signs of life. After we arrived other family members followed, until
the house and yard were full of shocked, grieving family trying to
make sense of the impossible situation we were sharing. That kind of
shock is a trigger - for mourning and grieving, yes, but also for
deep self-assessment.  "What could I have done to prevent this" is a
first thought, followed by "how could I have made his life better,
how much did I take him for granted?"  In my case, that thinking
extended to all my family, friends, acquaintances - to all my life,
seeing the fragility and impermanence: how could it be better?  What
should a life be, what is the nature of our experience?  Ego, like
the elk, has worked to dominate and to protect, but in the moments
following the death of someone close, I could see that the stakes
I've been fighting for, day in and day out, are tiny. My tiny life.

And I could see, grieving with others the same loss, that the real
and better source of protection is love, not resistance.

Prominent people died in 2016, a year of news dominated by
obituaries, including the Turkish ambassador Bruce mentioned... and
Leonard Cohen, who wrote near the end...

You say I took the name in vain
I don't even know the name
But if I did, well really, what's it to you?
There's a blaze of light in every word
It doesn't matter which you heard
The holy Hallelujah....

Bruce has said to me, many times over, "Every day is a gift." And he
says above, "...prize your existence this year. Life is precious and
should be valued, for
it's so easy not to have it."

Don't worry about Trump or Putin or this or that political party
ruining your life: it's yours to ruin or not, and we are empowered
to do better, and we could do better by loving more and resisting
less. 

The world is not defined by politicians or pundits, or by news, real
or fake. Check out "99 reasons 2016 was a good year," at
[https://medium.com/future-crunch/99-reasons-why-2016-has-been-a-great-year-for
-humanity-8420debc2823#.xrmlqrejx] 

In fact, the world is a better place than we realize, great things
are happening, bodhisattvas appear every day to guide the rest of us
away from suffering. Scientists, engineers and innovators work away
improving the world, ignoring politics, news, and despair. 

The real state of the world, incomprehensibly complex, is as readily
characterized by joy as by despair. 

In the USA, I think Donald Trump's election is less of a problem
than the fear response I've seen in many public and private comments
by my compatriots. Fear is unproductive, fear is paralyzing... the
path to hell is paved with fear. The question I would ask is, what
reality does this election result manifest, and what is the most
productive, most helpful response?  We appear to be seeing a
reaction to globalization, not just in the USA but elsewhere, e.g.
Brexit.  How do we speak to the fear and anxiety driving that
reaction? What is our path forward?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #12 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 17 07:49

    
And how do we respond to destructive forces in the world? E.g. (via
Bruce) "Aleppo, the war in Syria, the barrel bombs, the
Russian special forces creeping in from Ukraine, the ethnic
cleansing, the disaffected 22 year old cop who turns his own gun on
his masters because of some fit of political rage that he judged was
worth his own life"?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #13 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:24

    
The Great Game, that was Andrei's circus,  Such is the Westphalian
order.  Been like that quite a while. This world doesn't lack for
people who are glad Andrei Karlov is no longer with us.  I'm not
glad, but I noticed that people who wrung their hands over Karlov's
sad death said nothing much about 35 Russian guys just like Karlov
who just got kicked out the the USA on the pretext of
cyberespionage.   They're like him, pretty much.  However, I feel
differently about them after this Karlov moment I had.  Although
they're faceless and leaving under a cloud, I'm more aware of their
living presence as individual people, somehow.  Less inclined to
freeze them and polarize them as icons of threat.

 Not that I forgive them for cyberspying, but really, getting kicked
out of a country is such a personal drag.  You've got to sell your
house, get rid of your car, fire the babysitter, fill out all kinds
of stupid international paperwork…  One minute you've got a plum job
in Washington, a weird foreign power where things are just getting
lively and interesting, and next day you're packing a valise like
some goddamn Syrian refugee. 

 Just because you've been spearphishing VCs, CEOs and Congressmen,
whatever.  Sure, it's sneaky and against the host country's national
interests, but were you supposed to NOT do that?  You're in the
freakin' diplomatic corps!  It's an existential condition. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #14 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:27

    

People who exult at Karlov's death act realpolitik about it, with
sentiments such as, "Well, I don't condone Muslim terrorism, but the
Russians got in hot water with this Syrian thing and that's the kind
of vicious attack that their wicked meddling provokes," but, well,
there's still Andrei.  A formerly living being. He's not geopolitics
in the flesh, he's a guy full of holes on an art gallery floor.

Andrei followed political reality.  It's not that he gets a clear
moral choice in the matter.   How could he possibly refuse the post
of ambassador to Turkey?   Could Andrei say  "Well, I'm a career
diplomat, and this is a plum post in my career where I can really
make a difference, but -- I think I'll back out on this top-notch
assignment because, well, uh, the death of innocent civilians in
Aleppo is morally dubious!"

Karlov is never gonna say any such thing.  He might think it
sometimes, but a diplomat without the morally dubious is like a
lawyer without crime.  So sure, the guy may well have been as
crooked as a fresh basket of Kamchatka crabs, but I wouldn't
reproach Karlov for his line of work. 

Plus, Karlov was educated, intelligent and sophisticated.  If I
started effectively picking at his leprous moral scabs, he would
probably riposte. Something along the lines of, "So, Mr Cyberpunk
Writer!  Are you aware that young men in my country are obsessed
with computer crime, due to you and your colleagues romanticizing
this kind of misbehavior in your decadent novels of the 1980s?"  Not
to mention Karlov's own colleagues, just tossed on their ears for
cyberespionage.  

Why, I can remember when Cliff Stoll used to write books about that
Russian cyberstuff, and nobody believed it was possible.  If I'd
known things were gonna turn out the way they did in 2016, I might
have been a tad more proactive.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #15 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:32

    
 don't claim I'm Karlov's moral equivalent, but suppose that it was
me shot in the art gallery, instead of him.  That's plausible,
surely.  I'm just some scribbler, but people shoot journalists way
more often than they shoot diplomats.  There are all kinds of swell
reasons to shoot journalists, or even bloggers.  I haven't
carpet-bombed Aleppo recently, but surely I could get promptly mowed
down at a Turkish discotheque.  So many do.

Now imagine Karlov happening to notice me getting killed, while he's
comfortably alive at his embassy.  I think that I would like him to
have this same kind of attitude that I had toward him.

I would not want Karlov to thunder indignantly, or yell that the
assassins who killed the nice science fiction novelist deserve
relentless justice, or all that common War-on-Terror boilerplate. 
In 2017, that just seems so hokey.  It's formulaic.  There's an
insincerity about it.  

No, I'd like Karlov to glance over my obit, "Oh well, another dead
writer, got into some kind of weird trouble; that happens, it's a
tangled world now, tough luck for him.  Hope he was doing his best."
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #16 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:35

    
If Karlov were to join us from beyond the grave in this WELL
discussion, it wouldn't surprise me if he were quite clear-headed
and analytical about it.  He wouldn't cry in his vodka about his own
sudden, violent death, because he's not the only Russian patriot in
a welter of his own blood in the Middle East at the moment.  

Probably Karlov would point out that the formerly hostile Turkish
government has made a full apology, and named a street and a square
after himself, and that the Russian diplomatic hand in this NATO
Moslem country is much stronger than it was before his sacrifice. 
So, although he fell in the line of duty, he hasn't been defeated.
No,  it can be truthfully said that his time at his post in Turkey
has advanced Russian aims considerably.  Maybe even historically.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #17 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:36

    
It wouldn't even surprise me if Karlov  even made some suavely
diplomatic remarks about his 22 year old cop assassin, with the
more-in-sorrow than-in-anger tone that us 63-year-olds like to
affect -- that there are many similar hotheads as tragically misled
as this young man, that the leaky Turkish security services could
use some Russian advice, and so on.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #18 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:36

    
Karlov would also likely make some remarks about Trump that would
irritate the WELL readership considerably.  He'd be inviting Russian
fake accounts into the chat here, trying to mess with our opinions,
the newly-standard adversary antics of a poisoned global Internet.  

He's got an alien value system, his activities don't align with my
interests, but somehow, I'm beyond that kind of knee-jerk irritation
not. Troll hot buttons rarely get to me at the dawn of 2017, I
understand them as the counterfeit pennies of the modern
intellectual marketplace.  Karlov is dead, and I take his death
"personalitically."  The personal is the political, and he's like a
freshly coffined microcosm of the trouble we share from pole to
pole.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #19 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 2 Jan 17 09:40

    <scribbled by loris Mon 2 Jan 17 17:17>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #20 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 17 13:02

    
The Russian cyberattack story has detractors, e.g.
http://arstechnica.com/security/2016/12/did-russia-tamper-with-the-2016-electi
on-bitter-debate-likely-to-rage-on/ and http://www.robertmlee.org/critiques-of-the-dhsfbis-grizzly-steppe-report/. Donald Trump questions the intelligence community's, and the Obama administration's, strong assertions that Russians hacked (or phished) the DNC.

From what I know of the intelligence community, I can't imagine that
they could reveal their best sources for the story, hence the weak
report.

And we know that every intelligence agency worth its salt is hacking
and phishing with a vengeance - all part of the
intelligence-gathering apparatus. If they put their hides together,
they could collaboratively produce a state of the world report that
would make this conversation seem thin and pale by comparison. 

I'd be shocked if they weren't practicing this kind of surveillance.
What's new here, if the Russians were behind the intrusions, is that
the data was "weaponized" (as pundits like to say) and deployed to
influence the U.S. election. Whether that influence was sufficient
to alter the course of the election is arguable, but the attempt
itself would be worthy of response. Not that the U.S. is entirely
innocent of meddling in the political affairs of other nations.

Looking on the bright side... if we're going to have wars, hacking
and retaliatory sanctions are no doubt preferable to nuclear attacks
and counter-attacks.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #21 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 3 Jan 17 12:16

    
A quick one: I just tweeted this Vox interview with Harvard
psychology professor and polymath Steven Pinker:
http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/12/22/14042506/steven-pinker-optimi
stic-future-2016

Pinker says we should "look at history and data, not headlines. The
world continues to improve in just about every way. Extreme poverty,
child mortality, illiteracy, and global inequality are at historic
lows; vaccinations, basic education, including girls, and democracy
are at all-time highs."

He's not a cockeyed optimist, but he's following the data. "I’ve
never been 'optimistic' in the sense of just seeing the glass as
half-full — only in the sense of looking at trend lines rather than
headlines. It’s irrational both to ignore good developments and to
put a happy face on bad ones."

"As it happens, most global, long-term trends have been positive. As
for the future, I like the distinction drawn by the economist Paul
Romer between complacent optimism, the feeling of a child waiting
for presents, and conditional optimism, the feeling of a child who
wants a treehouse and realizes that if he gets some wood and nails
and persuades other kids to help him, he can build one. I am not
complacently optimistic about the future; I am conditionally
optimistic."
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #22 of 198: Roland Legrand (roland) Tue 3 Jan 17 13:46

    
One could argue for being "conditionally pessimistic", as technology
advances and makes individuals and small groups ever more powerful.
There are young men who want a weapon of mass destruction and who
realise if they get the kind of wood and nails necessary to make
this thing and if they persuade enough other young men to help, they
can build it. 
Hence governments and intelligence services have to monitor ever
more each and everyone of us, since our individual powers to destroy
on a massive scale are increasing exponentially. The same logic
which makes us so individually powerful, calls for measures to check
the individual ever more carefully. What happened in 2016 and what
is going to happen this year, the hardening of the positions and the
antagonisms, the United States possibly even more retreating as a
global power and the emergence of ever more smaller or even very
small global powers, all this is making morbid scenarios of
"pessimistic conditionality" increasingly possible. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #23 of 198: Dave Waite (dwaite) Tue 3 Jan 17 14:39

    
Is this a balancing between the have and have not societies?

>Extreme poverty, child mortality, illiteracy, and global inequality
>are at historic lows; vaccinations, basic education, including
girls, >and democracy are at all-time highs."

While the world seems to be growing up around the United States, it
seems to me that the United States sinks deeper and deeper into the
middle of the pack on many of these points.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #24 of 198: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 3 Jan 17 14:48

    
World-readable short url for this discussion: http://bit.ly/sotw2017
Hashtag: #sotw2017

If you're not a member of the WELL, but you have a comment or
question to offer, send via email to inkwell at well.com.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #25 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 3 Jan 17 14:59

    

I don't want us to chat about dead guys during this entire SOTW,
although there were plenty of 'em last year and will be more. 
However, I'm thinking there may be some useful positive life-lesson
here.  

For instance, after seeing Karlov shot, I thought to myself -- you
know?  What about The Vladimir?  What if disaffected zealots also
appear in Putin's own security detail?  

Putin is supposed to be the sinister world leader-figure of 2017 --
mostly because he got some lucky breaks, and things are kinda going
his way -- but suppose we lost him in 2017?

Wouldn't people instantly cry buckets about Vladimir Putin?  They'd
sob and moan.  Especially if he met the fate of Karlov.

Of course Russians would be hugely upset, but wouldn't the vast
majority of  people worldwide also be seriously shocked,
disoriented, even traumatized?  After all, Putin's been a
stabilizing presence on the world stage for a generation.  Even
though he occasionally poisons an FSB traitor or has a journalist
iced and such, so that him getting killed as well is not some
outlandish prospect, it's not like Putin is Ivan the Terrible.  He
doesn't rage, bluster and chew the carpet.   His paid trolls are
trained to talk like paranoid lunatics, but Putin himself makes
quite calm, thoroughly-considered remarks.  He's statesmanly. 

Putin's not a peaceful guy -- he's a violent guy.  He's into judo,
spy subversion and occasional military adventures.  However,
compared to the new crop of deglobalized race-realists that Putin's
ushering toward power, Le Pen, Farange, Trump, Orban in Hungary,
Kascinzky in Poland, that wildly convulsing Turkish dictator --
Putin comes across like Louis XIV.

Putin biggest problem is that he actually IS a lot like Louis XIV,
in that classic sense of I-am-the-State and After-Me-the-Deluge.  So
if he suddenly demonstrated his mortality, as so many of us do,
well, people would be thunderstruck. 

 Putin actually vanished for a couple of weeks once. People were
nearly unhinged with anxiety.  No one was happy about his vanishing
trick, either -- they were all deeply anxious.

Maybe the proper attitude in 2017 is not piling such emotional
effort into: "What is this awful guy gonna do to mankind, what are
his dreadful capacities," but  "What if he's not around?"
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #26 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 3 Jan 17 15:07

    

If you apply this approach to The Donald it gets interesting.  The
Donald has the showman's gift of sucking all the air out of the room
-- so did Obama, actually.  That was one of Obama's major flaws as a
political actor.   

But if you remove The Donald, and then gaze at the Republican
alternatives, the prospect of The Donald improves by comparison.   
A Donaldless world is more disturbing than The Donald is.

For instance, even though he's obviously a con man, a rip-off artist
and thin-skinned egomaniac with zero interest in sane policy  -- Ted
Cruz is worse.   He's LOTS worse.  

Even though The Donald's iconic, and a lightning rod for polarized
anxieties, Sarah Palin is worse at that activity  than The Donald
is.  Sure, Sarah's considered a lunatic now, but The Sarah could
have been vice president, and maybe even President.  Yes, her, that
poor, deluded, blowhard creature.   For a woman with rural rootsy
affinities whose motto is "Faith, Family and Flag," Sarah's pious,
right-to-lifer family is more soap-opera-broken even than The
Donald's  bizarre family.

Paul Ryan, the current Speaker of the House, is, as far as I can
figure, the only guy in the Republican Party with a coherent
legislative agenda, other than looting.   But the guy's a Tea Party
fanatic. His ambitions are eye-blindingly radical, but, well, Ryan
could also easily  have been Vice President, and President.  
However bad Ryan's gonna get in 2017, consider that he could have
been that bad years ago.  Also, consider that the absence of The
Donald would probably empower Ryan vastly.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #27 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 3 Jan 17 15:08

    
People worse than The Donald have been circling the Oval Office for
years and years now.    Carson, vastly worse than The Donald. Carly
Fiorina, about as bad.  Rand Paul, lots, lots worse.  Mike Huckabee,
much, much worse.  Bobby Jindal, really bad, maybe not quite as bad
as The Donald, but surprisingly, thoroughly bad.  Scott Walker,
merely somewhat worse.

They weren't all entirely and uniformly awful politicians: Kasich
sort of okay, Rubio kind of interesting, Bush just a melancholy sign
of  the general political necrosis, but that's a Donaldless world.  
An extensively bad scene with deep roots in years of development.  
Even though The Donald is ludicrously disastrous, he's not some lone
Frankenstein creature.  He's part of the general texture of American
rot.  A society this extensively troubled, for such a long time,
should probably shouldn't be pitying itself for electing a Donald. 
Better if it somehow finds the courage to confront its own deep
inner Donaldness.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #28 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 3 Jan 17 17:50

    

bruce --- not being disputatious but just curious as to how you assess other
potential republican candidates as being -worse- than trump.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #29 of 198: david gault (dgault) Tue 3 Jan 17 18:22

    
>the courage to confront its own deep
>inner Donaldness

My theory is that Trump (and his Dad too, probably) wanted in to the
world of Manhattan's Upper East Side.  That wasn't ever going to
happen and Donald reacted by building garishness, poor taste,
conspicuous consumption and any other quality offensive to "old
money" into his developments.  It's very tempting to think Trump is
smart enough that he identified this closed clique of the UES as not
just his enemy, but the enemy of a lot of US voters.  Trump may know
more about the mechanics of power in the US (and the world) than we
expect, simply because he's been watching it enviously, from just
outside the clubhouse, for about 40 years.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #30 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 3 Jan 17 19:06

    
Administrivia
Only members of the WELL can post directly to the conversation, but
others can send questions or comments to inkwell at well.com, and
our hosts can post them here.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #31 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 17 05:35

    
*Well @loris (and it's nice to see you), I think Trump's former (and
current) Republican rivals are worse than Trump because their ideas
are more pernicious, their intentions are commonly as bad as his,
they're more fanatical than him and they probably could do a lot
more practical damage to the American Republic than he can.

*Ted Cruz, for instance, is a smart-aleck, officious crank Texan
lawyer who's also bitter, scheming and cruel.  He has no friends at
all.  The Republicans who know Ted best hate him worst.  

*Paul is a daffy one-issue Randite zealot who never learns anything,
Huckabee is a lowlife Elmer Gantry schemer,  Jindal completely
wrecked his state through his sheer administrative incompetence, and
Bush is a hapless born-to-the-purple guy really has no proper role
in public life except for his genetics.  

*I could go on, but I don't like to heap partisan abuse on people
already defeated. I think most Republican voters would agree with me
that they're not much good.  Otherwise they would never have voted
for an over-the-top game-show host like The Donald.  But they choose
The Donald, and if that choice was insane, well, they're half the
American population.  If we're really in a madhouse, what else can
one expect but The Donald?  How "bad" is it when you get what you
deserve?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #32 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 17 05:37

    
*It's too early to judge the antics of the new Administration,
although the first day of the new Congress was awful -- they had
their hands in the cookie jar before they even reached the gavel. 
The people around The Donald are awful.  They're lowlifes and
huckster opportunists in it only for themselves, and they have zero
loyalty to him or respect for his judgment, because they know The
Donald doesn't have any.  He always, always wings it, he doesn't
even prep for a debate.  He can't.  Also doesn't need to.

You couldn't trust that Cabinet to run a lemonade stand.  They're
gonna steal everything they can see, and when they look for money to
steal, it's all sitting there in the room with them.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #33 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 17 05:38

    

*Why is The Donald maybe not bad in his obvious badness?  Well,
let's try a thought experiment.  Suppose The Donald was your best
ally.  Imagine the new President was fully on your side.  Would you
be happy about it?  Would you think, "Wow, this powerful, acute
politician is gonna get a lot done for me!  I'm gonna bask in his
favor?"  

*If you were any woman other than a Donald groupie  you'd obviously
be petrified, but really, if you had something  critically important
to do that needed doing well, would you ever hire Donald Trump to do
it?   Would you even let him in the building?

*I mean -- wouldn't you KNOW that it would always end up about The
Donald trying to look good, and everything around him ending up
ruined, Atlantic City style, Trump U style, ex-wives style?  The
guy's a transparent hustler, huckster and blowhard.  Everybody knows
it.   The people who know him best know that best.  I'm quite sure
he's gonna "destroy" a lot of stuff, but not by intention.  Not
through any malignant policy or plan -- he doesn't have one.  Mostly
he's gonna gravely damage the people who are rash enough to trust
him with anything.  That means the people in the room with him,
basically.  For a while that's gonna be members of his own Cabinet.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #34 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 17 07:32

    
I was amused to hear Trump say "I know a lot about hacking." Why
wouldn't he? He uses Twitter a lot, and his son has a computer. Why
would you listen to those 17 intelligence agencies, or to somebody
like Dmitri Alperovitch from Crowdstrike, when you've got your
Twitter feed right there? We live in a marvelous time, when even
someone of limited intelligence can leverage the wisdom of the mob,
er, crowds.

When it comes to global politics, Trump is an innocent. I suspect
Putin loves him because he understands well how to use him, how to
play to Trump's self interest, which is a sure win.  But Trump's
going to have a rough time, I suspect he's in over his head. And
despite common assumption, the President of the USA has limited
power - the checks and balances meant to constrain monarchist
tendencies are not easily defeated, especially by a political naif
who works harder at creating enmity than at building alliances. 
Trump's trouble not because he's a dictator in the making, but
because he's a wild bull in a China shop, and everywhere he looks,
he sees red.

The real "state of the world" question in all this is harder to
read, because his supposedly controlled unpredictability throws off
a lot of strange attractors. He's breeding chaos. He's hiring a
cabinet of wolves to guard the various henhouses of our government.

Meanwhile Ryan is angling to dismantle the New Deal, hoping that
Trump will be a support and not an obstruction. But reality,
politics, and hopefully cooler heads will hopefully stall the most
destructive legislation. E.g. how well can you expect to hack Social
Security and Medicare, with the boomer "demographic bulge" well into
retirement age and depending on those programs?

This is mostly about the U.S. and not about the world, but how well
can we disentangle the various interdependencies that have evolved
over years of trending globalism and deeper connection via the vast
active living intelligent system, the Internet?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #35 of 198: Alberto Cottica (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 17 10:59

    
Question via email from Alberto Cottica: 

Hi, thank you so much for hosting this great discussion. My
question: do you have any thoughts on the State of Europe? 2016 was
quite eventful on our side of the pond.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #36 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 4 Jan 17 12:43

    
agree with all analyses about trump, his cohort, and other repubs.
just, they all seem like different forms of nausea, not sure I can
differentiate.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #37 of 198: William Cunningham (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 17 15:50

    
Via email from William Cunningham:

This article from the Atlantic today nicely frames a real
contemporary problem:

https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2017/01/electoral-college-tr
ump-argentina-malaysia-japan-clinton/512153/

Basically in many countries, including the US, constitutional
representation favors rural constituent priorities over urban,
despite the fact that demographically the vast majority of
populations are urban, not rural.

Old, difficult to change representative structures empower
conservative minorities over the whole world.

Do you see or feel any energy around underrepresented urban
populations working around national governments that refuse to serve
them?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #38 of 198: John Coate (tex) Wed 4 Jan 17 18:45

    
One could say then that the electoral College is a form of
affirmative action.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #39 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Wed 4 Jan 17 21:26

    
From George McKee:

Thanks to BruceS and JonL for the annual wrapup.  As a still-current
Texan, I agree with Bruce - the Ted Cruz bullet that just missed was
incredibly lucky.

I think this is becoming my annual question:  What media, if any,
received a death certificate last year?  Were any new media born? 
Does fake news count as a distinct medium?

Politically, it seemed to me that Twitter displaced volunteer "feet
on the ground" as the most cost-effective means of voter
mobilization.  Is this a real trend, or is The Donald just awesomely
talented at media exploitation?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #40 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:43

    
Thanks for the dead-media hint.  We haven't talked about technology
yet.  Quite the departure from most previous WELL SOTWs.

And why is that?  Is it because we geeks know as little about "The
Cyber" as The Donald does?  No.  It's because it's just not as
interesting this year.

During the past  three or four years, I've been going on and on
about "surveillance capitalism" and the  unprecedented power of the
dominant industries of the Twenty-Teens,  Google Amazon Facebook
Apple Microsoft.  "The Stacks," for short.  

And, in theory, the Stacks oughta be on top of their game in 2017.  
They should be launching a deft and spectacular Internet-of-Things
land grab that hustles all of physical reality into their grip.  Any
effective resistance from the earlier industrial order has ceased. 
The digital imperative has taken command.

The Donald won't stop 'em.  He's a TV and Twitter fan who lacks any
tech policy. Of course he'll sell off "net neutrality" to whichever
hustler agrees to make The Donald look best on a screen, but (a) The
Donald doesn't know who that is (b) they won't really do it and ( c)
he's never gonna look good to the zillions of people who already
hate the sight of him.  So he'll simply "wreck the Internet" without
ever knowing what it was.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #41 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:44

    
But, "the Internet" is done already.  It had a great historic arc,
but it maxed out on its own excesses and unconfronted issues, much
like the Space Age and atomic power did.   Anybody who still thinks
"net neutrality" is the be-all and end-all of the modern tech biz
can go somewhere where they still enjoy net neutrality -- the
flatness, the small pieces loosely joined, the permissionless
innovation, etc.  

Go to  Iceland, maybe.  Sure: go start a no-permission Internet
website in Iceland.  Birgitta Jonsdottir will be nice to you, you
might even get fan mail from Wikileaks.  Otherwise, it's quite like
building your own crystal-set ham radio.  Nobody will stop you,
because it just doesn't matter.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #42 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:45

    
I'm starting to think that the Big Five has turned into Detroit --
meaning the  bloated, self-satisfied, chrome and tail fins Detroit
-- with amazing Internet speed.  They're big, but flaccid and
hapless.  I'll run through that a little.

Google: they're harebrained.  Their moonshots all miss the Moon. 
Why are they "Alphabet"?  What was gained by that?   Why all the
fuss over the radically overhyped  car and the silly goggles?  What
do they want from themselves?  Why are they "assembling the world's
knowledge" in a world that depends on them and yet is obviously
saturated with lies, rumor, fear and the madness of crowds?  They
drink their own Google  bathwater.  There's nothing between them and
world domination except the stark fact that they can't get a grip.

Apple: so stodgy.  The rich guy's rose-gold wrist toy.  Why are
their devices "thin"?  Why was that ever a quality to worry about in
a computational consumer device?  Sure, Apple is wreathed in
high-profit fur and diamonds, but they're coming across like Zsa Zsa
Gabor.  Elderly, formerly-daring, an aging diva who is transgressive
in ways that nobody thinks are actually liberating.

Facebook: bitter, toxic, creepy.  Best friends with Nazis, black
martyrs, spies, deceivers, anybody you hate.  Imagine there's no
Mark Zuckerberg suddenly -- (because Mark lost a brother-in-law in a
shocking accident, sadly for him).  Who cries in a world without The
Zuck?  His wife, kid, sister, immediate family will be very upset.  
Everybody else: secret sigh of relief.  The guy's got two billion
friends but nobody likes him.

Microsoft:  simply old-fashioned.  Like a office-supply company. 
The place where good ideas in computation go to die, but can't leave
because of the catering.

Amazon:  Actually, Amazon is looking pretty good.  Best of the lot. 
Unfortunately, there's only one guy with any clout there, Jeff
Bezos.  Bezos is a great businessman, but he's now the Washington
Post and therefore out of favor with the regime.  Maybe that's the
right moral place for a business leader of his world changing
caliber now, but obviously the red-staters are gonna try to beat
Bezos up, probably by attacking his sales-tax advantage, which is
bullshit nowadays anyway.   Still, he's got the Amazon Cloud and
Alexa voice-computing, which are new computational initiatives with
users and revenue.  Bezos looks like a genuine captain of industry,
so I'll be spending more time watching him this year than I used to.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #43 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:47

    

*Why are the Stacks so  inept?   You might argue, "Well, the Stacks
aren't genuinely special, they're really standard American
corporations.  They got fat and dumb because that's the nature of
established American conglomerates.   Outside their fat cat silos, 
'technology' will still race on, bypassing them disruptively." That
sounds plausible, but  you know, where exactly?   How?  Who?  Is
there any objective evidence of that happening?


Samsung?  The self-igniting jet-destroying company.  You can't climb
a plane without a free ad against Samsung.

Huawei.  The South China Sea, industrial espionage, Great Firewall
of China, enough said.

IBM.  Watson, I really really need you, but your pet AI shows up
dead broke.  Watson can't make money fast enough to bail 'em out of
their spiral.

Intel.  The tragic prince.  They make desktop computers in a world
where Moore's Law is dying.  Intel did their level best for Moore's
Law.  They couldn't save it, they couldn't make it pay.  They had to
give up, their idea of a powerful personal computer now is one that
runs Netflix better.  I can't help but think that the death of
Moore's Law marks the general death of an era; the loss of speed and
impetus there is  like the failure of supersonic flight for
aviation.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #44 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:48

    

Entire industry tech sectors, that are claimed to be novel, 
"innovative" and "disruptive,"  don't just work, can't get traction,
or max out.  "Apps" were supposed to be the be-all and end-all, a
booming free marketplace for  the automated control of anything, but
scarcely anybody makes money there. There are millions of apps
available, and people tend to use just four or five.

Virtual Reality is decades old.  If you put on a VR mask you're in
bondage.  Somebody will steal your purse.  It's an interesting
experience, but so are 3D movies and isolation tanks.  If you look
at other forms of computer gaming, they're pretty much moribund. 
The gaming biz clutches at VR because the rest of that entertainment
biz is in a ditch.

Wearables.  People just don't wear them.  They try, they give up.  I
don't like to cruelly scoff here, I actually like my own wearable,
but the brave and innovative Pebble company went broke right on my
wrist.   Wearables don't work well as watches or jewelry, and health
monitors are of little use unless you're literally sick and dying.  

Ear wearables, or "hearables," are at least different and new, but I
wonder.  Wearables seem to get more attention than their feeble
sales and limited usefulness can deserve.

AR.  I adore Augmented Reality.  Totally dig it.  Always will,
probably.  I really like underground comics and neurofunk
drum'n'bass, too, but that doesn't make them major industries.

Driverless cars.  Okay, Google can't manage to build them, so who
can?  Are they the new "flying cars," forever promised, even sort of
possible technically, but never really around?  The Segways with
four wheels.  It's certainly not a good sign that Uber are pioneers
in driverless juggernauts, because Uber are profoundly malignant and
reckless and would kill you cheerfully.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #45 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 00:48

    

Then there's deep-learning AI neural nets for 2017.   Neural nets
are also decades  old, but I'm genuinely impressed by the new tech
advances here.  The new deep learners quite radical, capable and
interesting.  I don't, however, think they're gonna work in the way
that people currently imagine they're going to work.   

People think they are magic fortune-telling Big Data machines when
they're really instruments  more like camera filters.  I know that's
a weak analogy, but these deep learners aren't "smart" even though
they do behave rather like nets of neurons.  Technically, they're
like the retina of the eye: they can take huge blurs and roars of
data and turn them into useful, refined output.  

I don't, however, think they're gonna "revolutionize computing,"
because their workings are so opaque.  You can't mathematically
prove that you have an accurate answer with a deep-learner.  You
just get cool Ouija-board hints.  They strike me as a form of
decadence for computer science, frankly.  They have a baroque,
visionary, suggestive, occultist quality when at this historical
moment that's the very last thing we need.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #46 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 01:14

    
For Alberto Cottica:

http://www.politico.eu/newsletter/playbook/

Yeah, in fact I find European developments just as remarkable as you
say; for Americans it's an encouraging sign that we haven't gone off
the deep end alone.

Brussels news was deliberately designed to never be exciting.  Now
Brussels news is in fact pretty exciting, which is not good news if
you're a fan of the European Union.  This huge rickety technocratic
structure may be one of those things that can only be understood in
historical retrospect.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #47 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 01:59

    
http://www.politico.eu/article/dirty-dozen-kaczynski-vestager-flynn-sarkozy-ba
rnier-eu-2017-selmayr-beppe-grillo/

*That's a pretty good list of the weirdest political actors in
Europe for 2017.  It's a listicle, and it's trying to be funny,but
yeah, that's where a lot of the fault-lines are on the Old Continent
these days.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #48 of 198: Jonathan Smith (jas) Thu 5 Jan 17 05:44

    
"Then there's deep-learning AI neural nets for 2017".. my own take
is that the current work is developing the low-level components that
will make real AI possible later on. This is similar to what
happened when the electronics industry developed transistors and ICs
that were the basis for much else.

I am very interested in Bayesian methods as these have many of the
benefits of neural nets, but can provide a coherent answer as to why
they reach a particular conclusion.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #49 of 198: Jeffrey Vagle (jvagle) Thu 5 Jan 17 06:59

    
"[Machine learning has] a baroque, visionary, suggestive, occultist
quality when at this historical moment that's the very last thing we
need."

I agree wholeheartedly, but there's a strain of automation bias
going around--especially in government and regulatory circles--that
has pointed a fairly sizable amount of money and resources toward
leveraging machine learning in the never-ending quest for
efficiency. I doesn't appear as if this train will be slowing any
time soon, and there are a growing number of us in law and
technology circles who worry about the effects, especially in police
and military applications. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #50 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 07:01

    
Bruce got me thinking about my own ongoing experience with "the
stacks," and the experiences of others around me, including my
grandchildren, who are grown now, and have lived their lives with
the Internet - they've never known a world without Google, Facebook,
Twitter, IOS, Instagram, etc. 

        When Bruce and I first met, we lived a few miles from each other
but rarely visited. We could call each other via landline, and we
crossed paths on an early computer bulletin board system (BBS)
called SMOF, for "Secret Masters of Fandom," run by a modest
guy/secret master, Earl Cooley, whose handle was "shiva." I had my
first computer, an early Intel-based PC made by PCs Limited, a
company that later changed its name to Dell Computers. It was a
heavy box with a monitor on top - a monitor that could only display
ascii text, an amber monitor - which meant it displayed dark orange
text, a change from the usual green displays. It had a 300 baud
modem. I bought it because I'd learned, via the Whole Earth brigade
and their various publications, that computers could be  used for
conversation and community.  Forward thinkers, the Whole Earthers
had picked up on the new world of BBS communities and had started
their own, called the Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link or WELL.  An avid
reader of Whole Earth publications and eager to meet them and write
for them, but I was 1800 miles away, plane fare was expensive - and
long distance calls were relatively expensive, around $9 an hour.
Add that to the WELL's rate, around $2 and hour, and it would cost
me $11 an hour in 1990s dollars to connect. 

I learned all I could about the Internet when the WELL connected to
the network, because I could then use telnet to access it for free.
There was no such thing as a consumer-level Internet Service
Provider at the time, but I had Internet-pro friends that I'd met
through my nascent connection to the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
and they hooked me up. Though I knew barely enough to be dangerous,
I was an Internet expert, compared to most people. That was the
start of a new career, though I didn't suspect it at the time.

Some might say it's amazing how that primitive technology evolved
into the vast pervasive system we have now, but in the early 90s we
suspected that computer networks would eventually be prevalent.
Idealists compared the potential to Teilhard de Chardin's concept of
the "noosphere," where humans evolve a connected cognition, a
network of minds. Cyberpunk authors had a dystopian interpretation
of the potential futures at that point. In fact the Internet, like
the human race,  is wonderful and it is terrible.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #51 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 07:01

    
In the 21st century, technology is everywhere, supporting our best
and worst intentions. One salient point: technology has persistently
rushed ahead of our ability to understand its implications, and
there's a gnawing fear that tech advances will eventually be our
undoing - that intelligent computers will skewer puny humans, or
that we'll create mutant bugs that will wipe us out, or that we'll
build ultimate weapons that will scorch the planet and eradicate all
life. 

But the reality of this technology moment is the pervasiveness of
the network, and the efficiency of devices that keep us all
connected.  The Internet we knew is no longer, it's evolved into a
network that has been commercialized by some and weaponized by
others. And we're all using it. My wife, who in the 1980s worried at
my fascination with that plain-ascii monitor I was staring at so
intently, the thing I told her was a window, not a screen - is now
even more persistently screen-bound. Wherever you go, anyone you see
is likely staring at a small device, a computer we still call a
"phone," doing diverse things - reading headlines, seeing messages
from growing communities of friends and acquaintances, sharing
photos, playing Angry Birds, checking the weather... 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #52 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 07:01

    
"The stacks" are the industrial components of this new reality, and
I'm less skeptical about their current state than Bruce.  As any
organization or community grows, it scales past a manageable scope
of activity and a manageable number of people, therefore changes,
split into organized chunks that have to work well collaboratively
for the entity's continued effectiveness. The stacks are all like
that - they've become networks of smaller organizations, and the
challenge is to orchestrate all those "small pieces, loosely joined"
as part of a whole.  I've worked for large organizations like that,
and I've seen how much process evolves, how much energy is expended,
just holding the thing together. The innovation at the core of the
company's value is in this context harder to sustain. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #53 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 07:02

    
Some people know me as a writer, thinker, sometimes activist,
sometimes amateur futurologist ... but those things are avocational,
not how I put bread on the table.  Some years ago, working with
Whole Foods Market, I was involved in early development of web-based
e-commerce. When I left Whole Foods, I became an independent web
developer, and since then, over the last two decades, I've spent
many thousands of hours running web development projects through my
own company, which in a later iteration was just me, working with a
set of preferred contractors. With a subset of those contractors, I
transformed my sole proprietorship into a worker-owned co-operative.
I'd always felt that the traditional top-down business structure was
antithetical to the supposed democratic intention within the U.S.,
and that it failed to leverage the potential creativity of within
the workforce.  So I was happy to share ownership, governance, and
profits with a smart group of developers, designers, and project
managers. This has worked well for us, though it would be more
challenging to transform a larger company into a cooperative
structure.  Some larger companies (most visibly Zappos) are
leveraging a system called Holacracy for more democratic governance,
by self-organizing teams vs management hierarchy. We've explored
that system, though it seems process-heavy.  We've also explored
some of the thinking labeled "self-management."
[http://www.self-managementinstitute.org/]

Worker co-ops and companies that practice self-management are
emerging as an alternative to traditional corporate structures, and
it will be interesting to see whether they can scale and sustain
their creativity and culture better than larger corporations,
including "the stacks." 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #54 of 198: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 5 Jan 17 11:21

    
Two news stories today on Mark Zuckerberg.  One talks about his political
ambitions and his plan to visit each state during 2017.  The other about a
weekly meeting in which he shares trade secrets.  Leakers are tracked down
and fired, and those firings are announced at the meetings, to the applause
of those not fired.

I suppose all social organizations in some way develop a Red Guard.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #55 of 198: John Spears (banjojohn) Thu 5 Jan 17 12:25

    
from <23>

>Extreme poverty, child mortality, illiteracy, and global inequality
>are at historic lows; vaccinations, basic education, including
girls, >and democracy are at all-time highs."

While the world seems to be growing up around the United States, it
seems to me that the United States sinks deeper and deeper into the
middle of the pack on many of these points.

-------------------------------

According to Pinker, the SOTW doesn't need a healthy USA, because
extreme poverty and inequality, education, life span, and democracy
are all tanking at home. 

I think a healty, egaliterian USA may be a good thing for the rest
of the world. I know that's a radical thought.

It seems the "stacks", like big oil and big auto before them, have
evolved to the point where their continued success is more
determined by political power than innovation. It's not innovation
for industry to follow cheap labor across the globe, yet people have
made billions at the cost of the losers.

I say the whole world loses when the US is destabilized by income
inequality, and the chickens are coming home to roost.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #56 of 198: Scott Leslie (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 13:34

    
Via email from Scott Leslie:

Enjoying the recap of "The Stacks" and wondering if Bruce or Jon can
add another one to comment on, Tesla. Not the same as the others,
but still maybe interesting potentially as a disruptive trojan
horse, an energy company masquerading as a car company?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #57 of 198: gmoke (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 15:56

    
Via email from gmoke:

"Maybe, as Rex Tillerson said of climate change, the difficult
current state of the world is 'an engineering problem, and it has
engineering solutions.’"

I’d say that viewing the world as an engineering problem is part of
the problem.  It might be good to look at it as a systems problem
for a little while. In a dynamic system, it’s a question of stocks,
sinks, and flows.  Jay Forrester died this year too.  It might be
good to put his systems dynamics glasses on for a change.

What Pinker calls conditional optimism can become Tom Sawyer
organizing, which is often a lot of fun.  For instance, at present
prices, providing entry level electricity (light, cell phone) to the
1.4 billion people, 200 million families that don’t yet have access
to it costs about $1 billion, retail. That’s also a solar civil
defense for all of us who do have access now, just in case of
emergency or disaster.  Initiate a buy one, give one program and we
could crowd fund the end of deep energy poverty in a few years,
solar production capacity willing.  There’s already one pilot
program that plans to provide a solar light for every family in the
Dominican Republic at $5 a pop and a Chinese company, Ying Li, is
selling solar lights at the $5 price point in Africa.

I too took Andrei Karlov’s assassination "personalitically.”  His
death was a human death, as mine will be.  We are all in jeopardy at
every moment and every day is, indeed, a gift.

In thinking of a world without The Donald, or Don the Con as I call
him, you forgot to mention Mike Pence, the actual Vice President and
the person who would take over if we lost the Twitterer in Chief. 
Pence is more dangerous than Don the Con if only because of his
Dominionist pedigree and associations.  The man with that great head
of white hair may be the Man on the White Horse leading onward the
Christian Soldiers, carrying the cross, wrapped in a flag.

Bruces, I first heard of Beppe Grillo in a SOTW and am interested on
your take on what is happening in Italy.  I’ve been tracking the
rise of the authoritarian nationalist Right in countries like
Hungary, Poland, Japan, the Philippines, and other countries for a
few years now and would appreciate some global perspective as well
as takes on individual nations like Italy or the presently anomalous
Austria.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #58 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 17 15:58

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

bruces' commentary on the stacks and Jon's description of his own
career arc got me thinking of my own started-in-mid-life career
change and move to Silicon Valley. (Now, Silicon Forest.)

Man, things have changed since 1997. How . . . not fun it has all
become. How cheap and nose-to-the-grindstone. No slack time to screw
around with ideas for patents. No getting paid to go to night
school.

How specialized my work has become; with the application I work on
moving to the Cloud, there's no walking to a server room to pull
cables and drives to simulate outages, or working with a developer
designing a new file system. The shaggy-beard board layout guys, and
the mechanical engineers who designed cooling fans and chassis, are
long gone. The whole Linux / CS nerd / hack-your-own tools culture I
got grounded on at CMU has given way to a vertically integrated MS
environment.

What makes me look forward to wrapping up this gig is the prospect
of doing *something* fun with the crazy little computers coming out
of the Maker movement; Raspberry Pis and Arduinos and the like. You
can make networks of those that have nothing to do with an ISP; run
applications that don't require a Google account or Microsoft
subscription. I'm glad kids are learning on them and being
encouraged to muck about with them. A way to innovate outside of the
walled garden of the stacks.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #59 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 17 23:35

    
The Biggest Technological Failures of 2016.  The world needs more
tech journalism of this kind.

https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603189/the-biggest-technology-failures-of-2
016/?set=602944

People are complaining on Twitter that I'm being too mean to
Microsoft, that they've improved a lot under their new CEO.  That's
true; Microsoft used to throw their weight around actively
repressing tech developments, nowadays they either don't care to or
don't have to.

I'm sure that all the Stacks would like to be dynamic and
innovative.  It's their gospel, it's what they say all the time. 
It's the ideology.  But, you know, the ideology of spaceflight is
all about dynamic and innovative, too, yet the International Space
Station is set for decommissioning at the end of the decade.  It
makes you wonder about all these hobby rockets that Musk and Bezos
and such are so into; even if they've got 'em working, where are
they supposed to go?

There's plenty to do in outer space, communication, sensors,
astronomy and all that, but none of it has eye-popping wow-factor. 
I get it that the Stacks really want eye-popping wow-factor, they're
into the Insanely Great for deep cultural reasons, but in 2017
they're like wallowing 300 pound rich guys in alcoholic denial who
still want to be treated like high school star sprinters.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #60 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 17 00:44

    
*I see that those Russian diplomats scrambling out of the USA are
gonna have plenty of company from American diplomats forced to
scramble back in to the USA.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/05/us/politics/trump-ambassadors.html
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #61 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 17 04:36

    
We like to say, here on the WELL, that we own our own words. But out
in the "Stacks" that is no longer true...like the EULA's all gamers
dread, we have given away our content to our Social Media overlords.


As we watch Net Neutrality go down the drain, are we watching
privacy go with it? Can we own our own digital identity and content
anymore? Bruce, I know you protect your Tweets, we all have blogs. I
am about to get my own server and cloud and run my own network; but
it's almost like trying to carve my own Luddite asteroid in
cyberspace. 

Where is this all going? 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #62 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 17 05:01

    
And the Singularity and Ray Kurzweil's tribe??? They've been silent
for a while...with all the developments in AI, getting any closer,
ever gonna happen? 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #63 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 17 06:08

    
I saw a recent panel discussion at "Singularity University."

And no, I'm not making that up:  https://su.org/

There was a lot of the expected rah rah, and then they asked one
panelist what he thought of all this.

He said he'd been working in Silicon Valley for decades and "for the
most part, the history of change is a history of sorrow."

Way not to be invited back for next year's panel!
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #64 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 07:45

    
Unsurprisingly (because how could he not?), Barack Obama signed the
National Defense Authorization Act into law just before Christmas,
on December 23. It included the bipartisan "Countering Foreign
Propaganda and Disinformation Act," which among other things is
supposed to "counter foreign propaganda and disinformation directed
against United States national security interests and proactively
advance fact-based narratives that support United States allies and
interests." 

Note this in Wikipedia: "Supporters of the resolution inside the
Defense Department have publicly expressed their desire to weaken
the interpretation of domestic propaganda protections, laws which
prevent the US State Department from gathering information necessary
to develop targeted propaganda messaging and prevent them from
explicitly attempting to influence opinions. In these public
comments it is argued that the internet and social media is not the
American homeland, and therefore not subject to the protections
afforded inside the United States. Similarly, laws and legal
interpretations such as the Smith-Mundt Revision Act have allowed
government generated news media to be distributed to the American
public over television, radio and other media. The cited opinions
make clear that targeting Americans who are 'fans' of foreign
supplied media are problematic for United States narrative efforts
is an important aspect of social media propaganda programming
performed by the Department of Defense, where it is argued that the
State Department could benefit by adopting similar interpretations
of the law."
[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Countering_Foreign_Propaganda_and_Disinformation_Act]

I'm seeing posts and reports citing this bill, and interpreting its
passage as "legalizing propaganda" and the spreading of "fake news."
This in response to concerns about fake news being distributed by in
the U.S. from various sources, from crass commercial news generation
schemes to internal partisan propaganda sources.  

Those who are excited about the bill color their reports by tying
the legislation to Barack Obama: he signed the Defense
Authorization, as any president would, but his failure to veto the
bill is said to be part of an agenda tied to whatever evil Obama is
supposed to represent - the elite political establishment, the
socialist cause, whatever.  As if the bill wasn't in fact a product
of Congress,  supported by both Republicans and Democrats - not
something Obama created as part of the conspiracy to, er, govern.

Very meta, this: fake news about fake news, propaganda about
propaganda. 

And the Internet is, unfortunately, a powerful platform for
propaganda from all sources. It's been interesting to see its
effective use over the years to undermine the Obama administration
and characterize Obama, a centrist, as a socialist, an elitist, a
dork, or worse.  

Propaganda and fake news are indeed pervasive within our information
ecosystem. We have a perfect storm of information failure in the
U.S., especially, and probably globally.  It's partly that the
Internet has evolved as a plethora of new information channels,
public and (semi)private, that are beyond the ability of cooler
heads to track, vet, and refute. There's just too much noise. The
growing competition for mindshare has thrown traditional journalism
against the ropes, hard. News organizations are scrambling for ad
dollars and having a hard time resisting the persistent temptation
to sensationalize, to produce clickbait instead of news.  Critical
thinking's not in vogue. The best journalists are struggling to do
what their best work against market resistance.  I have to wonder
how Ed Murrow would have fared in the 21st century - we could use
another Murrow right now. 

I studied journalism, and I've done some journalistic writing over
the years, though I've never supported myself as a professional
journalist.  Every year I attend the International Symposium on
Online Journalism [https://online.journalism.utexas.edu/], where I
can hear the best new (and some old) journalists discuss advances in
technologies for news reporting.  

I know that serious journalism is still a thing - journalists are
working hard, often without expectation of decent salaries, because
they get, and they love, the profession. 

And we're entering an era where sophisticated, carefully vetted
journalism and support for critical thinking will be essential to
avoid a complete meltdown into a bog of corruption and vice. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #65 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 17 09:03

    
The feedback/endorphin loop of click/warm fuzzy, click/warm fuzzy as
exemplified by FB likes, reposts, comments, etc. moves at the "speed
of byte". Who cares about the truth? Just give me my fix...and on to
the next click; more please! 3/8ths of a second at a time, all day
long.

That seems to be par for the course during a digital day. And we are
raising a generation of kids who don't know anything else and use
three screens at a time for "relaxation". It's already a recognized
disorder in psychiatry and we haven't even gotten to Virtual yet.
And it's all looking a lot like the Matrix.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #66 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Fri 6 Jan 17 10:45

    
re # 63, who made that remark about sorrow and change?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #67 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 17 10:54

    
https://foreignpolicy.com/2017/01/05/10-conflicts-to-watch-in-2017/ 


*Syria/Iraq, Turkey, Yemen,  Mali/BokoHaram/Chad, Congo, Sudan,
Afghanistan, Myanmar, Ukraine, sort-of Mexico and other world
regions that will plausibly have  hell to pay in 2017.  

Venezuela didn't even make the cut.  Neither did Pakistan,
Philippines, or Korea.  It wouldn't surprise me if the biggest
military upheavals of 2017 are in regions previously untroubled. 
There  must be some Muslim areas of this world where  drone-wearied
jihadis can still get easy pickings.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #68 of 198: John Coate (tex) Fri 6 Jan 17 11:02

    
Indonesia could be ripe for that.  they just broke off mutual
defense from Australia for the Aussies "insulting" them by
disapproving of a state religion.  Bali is mostly Hindu and full of
western tourists.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #69 of 198: Paul Harrison (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 13:53

    
Via email from Paul Harrison:

As every year I am finding your discussion of the State of the World
insightful.

I am struck in the listicle that Bruce has linked to by a common
theme of people who say the unthinkable -- unthinkable to the
existing establishment, or to some government, or the consensus
reality of the news, or to us. Outside of the bounds of reasonable
discussion. Simply labelling something unthinkable, placing it on a
list, seems like weak argument. I would be interested in your and
Bruce's thoughts on ways to respond to the unthinkable.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #70 of 198: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 13:54

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Computer security breaches were some of the biggest stories of 2016.
Are we at peak hacker yet? How bad can it get before it starts
turning
around?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #71 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 13:56

    <scribbled by jonl Fri 6 Jan 17 13:57>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #72 of 198: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 13:57

    
Via email from Jamais Cascio:

Awhile ago it struck me that Trump is the real-world version of The
Mule from the Foundation novels. A disruption to any and all
scenarios and forecasts. How can you plan against Brownian Motion
Policymaking? He’s an agent of chaos, Loki in spray-tan.

Where this frustrates me most is regarding climate disruption. We’re
now seeing so many red flag indicators that things are beyond any
easy fixes that I’m trying really hard not to feel like giving up. I
gave a talk in China in mid-November, just a week or so after the
election, and I told the audience (combination of tech guys,
mid-level government guys, and students) that China needs to be the
hero now. The US isn’t going to be able to lead the world out of
this mess, and may well be antagonistic to any efforts to do so.
China has to take on a global role that they haven’t shown
themselves yet to be ready for.

Geoengineering is shifting more and more into mainstream scientific
and political discussions, much to my abject horror, and even the
big geoengineering scientists are starting to get into a “well, wait
a minute…” posture about how eagerly and desperately some groups are
looking at geophysical system hacking.

So, at this point, what’s your sense of where we’ll be going with
regards to climate?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #73 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 17 16:35

    
<63> Not sure, but if I get sufficiently motivated this weekend I'll
try to find out.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #74 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 17 16:49

    
I'd like to respond on three recent posts received via email...

> Respond to the unthinkable
Consider the assassin's creed and Naked Lunch-time motto, "Nothing
is true; everything is permitted." Who knows what's possible? Who
can track what's happening, infinitely in every direction? 
"Unthinkable" suggests a closet system and a closed mind, but we
have to be open, and that's true on more than one level. 

"Are we at peak hacker yet?"
I'm guessing we're into a persistent arms race, so the answer is
probably no. Security is evolving fast, so we'll doubtless see more,
and more effective, hardening of systems. It may be that the
technology is harder to break than we think - I'm always hearing
that so-called hackers have to resort to social
engineering/spearphishing to get the goods.

It's a sad thing, really, that "hacker" is a pejorative - the
original sense of the term, "digital explorer," was a great
white-hat/grey-hat characterization, but I suppose it was naïve to
assume there wouldn't be bad, sometimes very bad, actors writing
code and breaking locks. 

As Bruce said in the afterword to _The Hacker Crackdown_, "The
electronic landscape changes with astounding speed. We are living
through the fastest technological transformation in human history." 
And it ain't over yet... and "peak hacker" is probably much farther
down the path.

"Where we'll be going with regard to climate?"
I hang out occasionally with Michael Tobis (http://planet3.org/),
who's been sounding the climate alarm for many years now. He
recently posted from the American Geophysical Union meeting about
evidence that the world will warm more slowly than we'd thought
(http://planet3.org/2016/12/13/today-i-learned-day-2-of-agu-some-good-news/). If this is true, maybe we have more time to work on adaptation, assuming it's too late for mitigation.

I'm avoiding the assumption that the Trump administration will
undermine responses to climate change, but agree with the concern
about geo-engineering, especially given Tillerson's perspective ("we
can engineer our way out of it"). Trump is unpredictable, he
promised an open mind but that might not mean anything. But the
reality of climate change is increasingly hard to deny, and I'm
sorta thinking scientists and professionals will ignore an
ineffective government and work to do what's obviously necessary, if
the brains that be can come to common agreement about that...

Bruce will no doubt have smarting things than I to say in response
to these questions.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #75 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 17 00:47

    
*China might be the hero.  After all, they've been the top villain.

http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/05/world/asia/china-renewable-energy-investment
.html
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #76 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 17 01:38

    

*If anybody thinks that standard Al Gore rationalist, scientific
Blue State leftie environmentalists are destined to be the heroes of
this great crisis of  our civilization, well, they haven't been
entirely ineffectual, but they've gotta be one of the least
successful mass movements ever.   The real inconvenient truth is
that the truth is just not the be-all and end-all for people.  If
scientific evidence convinced mankind, nobody would be religious. 

I wouldn't "give up" about the ongoing struggle against the
continuing climate crisis, but it won't be reasonable Bright Green
technocratic solutions, passed by competent American governments,
saving the day here.  That  day's not gonna get saved.  That "day"
is well past now, and it might have passed way back in Earth Day
1970.  

The ruins of the unsustainable are the 21st century's frontier. 
Given the trends, it's pretty clear that the unsustainable is gonna
get ruined a lot faster than it looked.  We're Anthropocenic now. 
That's where we live.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #77 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 17 01:38

    

*With that said, I get annoyed by the kind of febrile leftist
melancholia that says, "Well, they failed to do what was obviously
correct by my cogent analysis, and therefore a Dark Age looms." 
It's not that your analysis was even mistaken, it's just that
reality isn't bound by your rationality.   There's a hell of a lot
of malignant carbon up in the sky, but black swans abound in this
world.  We could get a Tuva super volcano some day.  Any day,
really; they exist.  There could be a nuclear exchange.  And in both
of those  dire cases, people would still be alive, thinking, and
acting.  Maybe even you and I would be alive then.  Probably not,
statistically speaking,  but somebody would live.
 
"Climate change" wouldn't matter much in those circumstances.  It
would still be around, and severe, too, but it would be public issue
number ten or so.  Should humanity "give up"?   What would we "give
up" about, exactly?  We personally would obviously be traumatized
and future shocked, but what makes us the ultimate moral and
historical barometer?  People would born into that  post-unthinkable
world.  Are they supposed to "give up" as soon as they're born? 
Why?

It's not "unthinkable" or "apocalyptic" for them.  For them, it's
just what there is.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #78 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 17 01:39

    

Also, in case you're reaching for the Oxycontin, consider it this
other way.  Suppose that Mar-a-Lago suddenly washes away in a
Florida Katrina, drowning half of The Donald's family.  The Donald
gets climate change religion suddenly, because, you know, The Donald
is a volatile, post-ideological guy.  

He then tells the Republicans that climate change has to become
their own issue.  The Sec-State/Exxon Mobil capo publicly recants
and admits he was wrong about everything.  The fundies take to their
pulpits everywhere to demand that Southern Baptists become ardent
biblical greens.  The Sarah says not to drill baby drill any more,
etc.  The American Right just steals the clothes of the Left and has
at it, the way they're suddenly pro-Russian.

*Do you think that this modern weird coalition of moguls and fundies
really has it together to "solve" anything that matters?  Even if
they changed their minds about one of their many major misjudgments,
would they have the competence and capacity to make any effective
amends?    They can certainly be active, they can rally, they can
pass legislation, but how would they effectively measure what they
had done?   They're not technocrats.  They don't care what's real.

And if they're basically useless, ineffective, for acts of good,
then why presume that they are somehow super-effective for bad?  
Ted Cruz is the kind of guy who would have been really effective for
bad.  Donald Trump is a horny game-show host.  

It's plenty weird that he became President, I'd rank that about
Fubar 9.2 on the official metric scale of contemporary weirdness. 
However, he's not suddenly a mystical genius or demiurge of mass
destruction.  He's a 70-year-old Donald Trump.  We're in for a
Punch-and-Judy show here.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #79 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 7 Jan 17 04:53

    
Just a reminder to those of you following along on the WWW:

If you're not a member of the WELL, but you have a comment or
question to offer, send via email to inkwell at well.com.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #80 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 7 Jan 17 07:15

    
https://archive.org/details/JDLasicaBruceSterlingreadsCarlSandburg
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #81 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 7 Jan 17 07:18

    
Thanks to @dan_blick for reminding us of Bruce's closing remarks at
SXSW 2006
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #82 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 17 07:36

    
https://www.instagram.com/anya.chapman/

*The Instagram account of Russia spy, money launderer, TV star and
fashionista Anna Chapman.  She is killing it!
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #83 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 7 Jan 17 08:47

    
These findings add weight to the idea that the planet is now
entering an Anthropocene epoch, a geological measurement of time in
which humans are having a significant global impact on the Earth's
geology and ecosystems.

http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-38519299?utm_content=buffer0ef7d&u
tm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #84 of 198: Jeffrey Vagle (jvagle) Sat 7 Jan 17 10:14

    
There's a fair bit of conflict preparation going on globally (some
of it more subtle than others) in areas (both geographic and
topical) that haven't seen this activity in quite some time, if
ever.

https://warisboring.com/in-lithuania-learning-how-to-block-tanks-with-trees-is
-back-in-fashion-be80504454db#.ezvbwuvz7

https://www.eff.org/document/eff-ad-wired-pdf

Are we seeing a renewed resurgence of the "fortune favors the
prepared" philosophy? 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #85 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 7 Jan 17 15:08

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 7 Jan 17 15:26>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #86 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 17 15:22

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 7 Jan 17 15:26>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #87 of 198: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 17 15:26

    
From Brian Slesinsky via email:

In 2017 it seems that propaganda forces of Russia and 4chan and
hundreds of millions of uncritical readers are winning at turning
the Internet into the "net of a million lies". Let's optimistically
assume for the sake of the argument that most people reading this
have some reasonable grip on the state of the world and can mostly
tell what to believe and what to ignore. But if you didn't start out
that way, how do you learn to be a reasonably informed scavenger of
the trash heap? It seems like that might be harder than ever:

"[...] too many students I met were being told that Wikipedia was
untrustworthy and were, instead, being encouraged to do research. As
a result, the message that many had taken home was to turn to Google
and use whatever came up first. They heard that Google was
trustworthy and Wikipedia was not."

Did Media Literacy Backfire?
https://points.datasociety.net/did-media-literacy-backfire-7418c084d88d

"I guess you could consider this a form of epistemic learned
helplessness, where I know any attempt to evaluate the arguments are
just going to be a bad idea so I don't even try. If you have a good
argument that the Early Bronze Age worked completely differently
from the way mainstream historians believe, I just don't want to
hear about it. If you insist on telling me anyway, I will nod, say
that your argument makes complete sense, and then totally refuse to
change my mind or admit even the slightest possibility that you
might be right.

"I consider myself lucky in that my epistemic learned helplessness
is circumscribed [...] But I think the average high school dropout
both doesn't and shouldn't. Anyone anywhere - politicians, scammy
businessmen, smooth-talking romantic partners - would be able to
argue her into anything. And so she takes the obvious and correct
defensive manuever - she will never let anyone convince her of any
belief that sounds 'weird' (note that, if you grow up in the right
circles, beliefs along the lines of astrology not working sound
'weird'.)"

Epistemic learned helplessness
http://squid314.livejournal.com/350090.html 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #88 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 17 16:05

    
Thinking of a couple of possibilities: 1) the lack of critical
thinking and resulting aggressive adherence to ideas formed
uncritically and without solid basis in evidence or thoughtful
research may not be a new phenomenon. Evidence-based, scientific
reasoning and critical thinking were likely exceptional, but
ill-informed thinking and belief was not visible, not shared widely
via public media as they are in the Internet era. Or 2) most people
simply didn't presume to think, and deferred idea and belief to
authorities: science, government, the church, journalists and
editors, etc.

Regardless, we now have an explosion of ideas and exchanges that are
rooted in ignorance and assumption and not clearly and critically
considered; memes that circulate via slogans and images and
compelling, disposable packets of belief. Trump's mastery of these
forms, his ability to capture and own so much attention and ride it
to the top of the political heap, can be seen as an extreme
deliverable of the state of social and shared media. 

(Digression: it wasn't so much Trump, but his smart son-in-law Jared
Kushner. Trump's campaign was in disarray until Kushner took the
helm, figured out how the media machines work in the 21st century,
and built the smart, agile, responsive organization that won the
day.)

I've been arguing what I felt was fact vs belief with some
acquaintances who, I felt, were smart but misguided. It's a waste of
time, and I should know better. A study recently showed that, if
someone has a strong belief and they're confronted contrary factual
evidence, they won't change their thinking - they'll dig in more
aggressively. You literally can't show people "the error of their
ways." And they won't see their biases, which raises a question for
me: in what ways am I ignoring facts, what biases do I have, how
solid is the foundation of my thinking?

I spent time sitting still and watching my mind without judgement,
and I find that softens the tendency to become entrenched, and
occasionally I can see  around my biases and assumptions. The
adoption of mindful meditation as a regular practice is growing,
it's even prescribed, apparently by professional psych shamans as a
medicine for melancholy. So perhaps there's a chance of softening, a
chance that more of us will become less attached to our assumptions
and beliefs.

And we could certainly adopt another practice, that of critical and
cautious thinking. Science is powerful because it demands evidence,
and even with evidence, the best scientists retain their skepticism.

By watching my mind, and also by encountering time and again
failings of my memory, I've come to have a skepticism even about
what I think I've seen and what I think I know. (My wife will be
surprised to read this: I should add that I don't always behave as I
should, knowing what I don't know.)  I suppose I'm just skeptical
enough to know that skepticism is a helpful default.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #89 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Sat 7 Jan 17 23:41

    
I've long thought that philosophy should be a required subject in
high school, with heavy emphasis on epistemology and ethics.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #90 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 17 02:41

    
Administrivia for those of you following from outside the WELL...

We try and keep our posts short and on point...if they go more than
6 paragraphs or so, or if we go off on a rant, we "hide" it, so
others can quickly read along and stay with the flow of the
conversation. You can click on the hidden response to see what was
written, or read to the end of the topic and go back to read the
lengthier posts. YMMV

'Slippage' means that someone else posted a question or response
before yours was posted. It let's people know why the placement of
your post may not seem to be in the flow of the conversation.

'Scribble' means there was an error or for some reason the writer
decided to delete the post.

Now back to our regular programming.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #91 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 17 03:03

    
http://casajasmina.arduino.cc/

Looks like Casa Jasmina is developing along quite nicely. How's the
house and the Fablab community over in Torino?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #92 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 17 09:13

    
It's great that so many are agreed that this is the Golden Age of
Bullshit, but you don't see many people sincerely admitting, "You
know what?  I see now that my own beloved filter bubble has been
full of bullshit!"  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #93 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 17 09:28

    
I'll readily admit it. Trick is to separate the good shit from the
bullshit!
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #94 of 198: Jeffrey Vagle (jvagle) Sun 8 Jan 17 10:15

    
But filter bubbles turn out to be more resilient that I think we'd
like to admit. Even when we consciously seek contrary facts and
opinions, we run up against human nature, as illustrated by research
in social judgment theory, the change-discrepancy relationship, and
boomerang effect. I'm neither a psychologist nor a sociologist, but
my understanding of the current literature points to a certain level
of skepticism re puncturing filter bubbles.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #95 of 198: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Sun 8 Jan 17 12:33

    
Those bubbles are maintained by human psychology, not by philosophy
or technology or logic. The human species is psychologically deeply
damaged. It's our inheritance from our own evolution as animals.

The way to 'convince' someone of things they don't believe is to
support them as they learn and heal. Most of us don't have enough
psychological slack of our own to do that work.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #96 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Sun 8 Jan 17 15:43

    
Eric Weinstein and Dave Rubin on Fake News, Trump, and the
Mathematical Mind (Full Interview)

https://youtu.be/LruYnDjkOgU

The first 6:45 is Rubin talking about what he's up to with The Rubin
Report.  Then the interview begins, running for more than an hour
and a half.  Worth every minute!
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #97 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 17 15:44

    
For your entertainment...a 'charticle' from David McCndless,
Intermental Disorders:

http://www.informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/intermental/
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #98 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 8 Jan 17 20:49

    
From Mark, via email:

< And if they're basically useless, ineffective, for acts of good,
then why presume that they are somehow super-effective for bad? > 

Ted Cruz is the kind of guy who would have been really effective for
bad. This seems logical but it uses a false premise. The republicans
have been making plans to diminish federal agencies for years. The
asymmetry is that is is easier to destroy than to create. What about
the likely scenarios that they break agencies and fail to replace
them with anything that works? I feel like too much of this
discussion centers around Trump. He's unlikely to be an effective
bureaucrat. What about the GOP's ongoing usurpation of power, as
witnessed by this latest coup giving themselves power to control the
civil service via salary manipulation?
http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2017/01/congress-can-now-cut-the-pay-of-i
ndividual-civil-servants.html I'd like to hear commentary on this, as it makes an end-run around division of the federal bureaucracy from party politics and the ability of agencies to manage themselves. "Fire this guy or else! Hire this guy or else!" 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #99 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 8 Jan 17 20:51

    
From Bradley, via email:

What of self driving OTR semis, even waldos.  Are they targets for
pirates?  Or will a Wal-Mart rig just be seen as the only workable
safe interstate point to point schism in a grand distribution plan
that could never do it all?

Tech militarization of national internal security forces seems to be
accelerating.Then there was that land-drone taking out a military
combat sniper in Dallas.How soon will an Amazon delivery robot tase
a vandal or thief, robocop style?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #100 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 8 Jan 17 20:53

    
From Scott Karl, via email:

Hi guys, always love this discussion to start off the year. I've
been living in Asia for seven years now (Korea for four, China for
three), and I'm constantly shocked how much western media seems to
drink the Kool-Aid about the wonders of Asia in general and China in
particular. From here, China is a complete mess that is teetering on
the brink of collapse (the past year their economy has been
completely imploding), while people in the west—the UK
especially—seem to treat it as our new overlords. What's with the
disconnect? For a specific example, lately I've seen a lot of
articles about China taking over solar power production. I've also
seen those solar power sites in person. They're fake, they don't
exist. The ones that get shown off are a ring of actual solar panels
surrounding a field of plastic sheeting painted to look like
photovoltaic cells. It takes about an hour to find this out. I see
stories about how great Asian education is, and from years of
working in it that just makes me laugh. They all graduate college
because it's literally impossible to fail out! Those amazing test
scores? They're fake. They take the best three schools in Shanghai
and report that as the entire country's results.


I don't get why anyone's buying this stuff. The Chinese sure aren't.
A lot of Koreans were satisfied with their lives but the real
Chinese Dream seems to be getting the heck out of China, not
whatever Xi Jinping was trying to sell them on. I have never met or
even heard of a single Chinese person with the means who is not
actively trying to get their assets out and get someone in the
family a foreign passport so they can emigrate.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #101 of 198: Nicholas Taber (nick) Sun 8 Jan 17 23:48

    
Stepping back, I find it philosophically puzzling that, as Jon said,
there is such a massive proliferation of ideas and exchanged rooted
in ignorance and assumption, and that Trump capitalized on these
forces in the media and internet - given that one would expect, at
their essence, information technology and mass media would be
conduits on balance for truth.  

Wouldn't our technologies like the internet, smart phones, etc.
ensure that the political and social equilibrium is ultimately more
determined by facts, truth, and reality?  Instead, this outcome is
far from it, as Jon, I think indicated.

I understand on a micro-level why it happened this way (memes, short
easy-to-swallow tidbits of nonsense everywhere, etc.). I get it.

But I do know that information technology should, in theory,
facilitate the dissemination of facts and truth (hence why tyrants
are worried about things like Facebook. Maybe after this Trump thing
they'll become Tyrant's favourite political tools). So then, why is
bullshit being disseminated more than facts, logic, reality, etc.  I
guess most of us suspect because it's less palatable, digestible,
etc.


I guess, unless we want the information revolution to degrade our
civilization (in this area) rather than improve it, this is the work
ahead of us.  I think it needs to somehow be recalibrated to create
much more powerful conduits for facts, reality, and truth.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #102 of 198: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Mon 9 Jan 17 03:57

    
Maybe, but that of course assumes we are really in charge of the
calibration. And that facts, reality, and truth constitute some kind
of telos, you know, that toward which the long arc of history bends.


Myself, I'm not so sure. Humans have been around for a couple of
hundred thousand years. We don't have much idea of what life was
like until about 5000 years ago, when people got interested enough
in themselves and things like truth to start writing stuff down, and
it's really only the last 500 where we can see those ideas take hold
as virtues. Don't get me wrong, I'm all in favor of them and their
cousins--rule of law, science, tolerance, etc.--but it seems pretty
clear to me that we're in the midst of a re-evaluation of that
ethos. 

Re-evaluation is probably too civilized and cerebral a word for what
is going on, maybe repudiation is better; one thing that unites
Trump and ISIS, among others, is their rejection of core
Enlightenment values. That strikes me as the beginning of a
large-scale historical shift, Trump et al symptom of some kind of
epochal disease rather than the cause. To put it another way, The
seams in the post-Enlightenment world view are being stretched past
their limits. AFter they tear open, whatever comes next may be
marvelous, but I'll bet getting there is going to be unpleasant.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #103 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 17 04:56

    
On the cogent topic of condemning other people's fake-news and
weaponized bullshit (but never your own), I naturally have to wonder
about my own culpability.  After all, I'm a science fiction writer. 
I don't spend all my time analyzing world affairs in the WELL SOTW. 
Heck no, I like making-up worlds.

And not only that, but as a science fiction writer, I'm not a
rational futurist and hard-science trendspotter SF writer  On the
contrary -- I do some of that sometimes, but I really like the
head-spinning, reality-melting, ontological-riffing bullshit aspects
of science fiction.  I like trippy stuff that can be made to sound
plausible, in some magician-patter fashion, and that feels
entertaining and mind-expanding, but really makes no more objective
sense than a rabbit out of a hat.

And that's supposed to be okay.  As long as you keep the rules
straight.  Science fiction is supposed to exist in this fenced-off
genre area where sandbox activities like this are okay, even fun.  

Sure, there have been a few historic slip-ups where way-out sci-fi
ideas became national politics here and there.  Like the Space Race
and moon landings, for instance.  And, you might argue that nuclear
power had some unfortunate sci-fi aspects.  And Reagan's Strategic
Defense Initiative, "Star Wars," wasn't really caused by the Star
Wars entertainment property, but it's close enough that it's 
bothersome.  The Hollywood  Star President comes out on TV and says
"Let's do the impossible!" and the military-entertainment
contractors all say "Yay!" while if you knew anything about the
physical realities of rocket science you knew it was 95% bullshit.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #104 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 17 04:56

    

But I wasn't super-involved in those historic issues personally. 
No, now I'm pondering the decades of tech-industry boosterism I've
been personally close to, and how much of that has turned out be
useless, toxic, our counterproductive "bullshit."  

Not that it was merely "mistaken," or an incorrect industry
forecast, or a failed startup, obsolete business sector, failed set
of investments.  Those are unfortunate, they certainly lose money, 
ad maybe they squander time and energy, but I don't feel like they
were morally culpable.  They don't deserve a rude and directly
pejorative term like "bullshit."

It's like a bad wine harvest.  The weather didn't favor you, the
grapes had pests, you try to bottle what you got off the hillside,
people drink it, they're like, "Nope."  Okay, that situation is not
"bullshit."  Bullshit occurs when you get some grape flavoring and
some raw ethanol and CO2 gas and you bottle that and label it "DOC
Champagne."  That when you're called out in that criminal activity,
you're like, "Okay, that was never a 'lie,' that was a harmless
labeling gimmick that I had to use in order to stay in business!"
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #105 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 17 04:56

    
Because "bullshit" isn't mere a deception, a "lie," it's an attempt
to gaslight, to ontologically destabilize the situation so that, not
only do you successfully sell your fake wine, but you convince
people that decent wine doesn't or can't exist, or that scales of
comparison and merit are meaningless.   

And you'll find ready  allies for  your effort in ontological
destabilization too, because, seen from, say, the temperance,
prohibitionist and public health demographics, ALL alcohol is
"bullshit."  Alcohol is a major poison, alcohol kills armies of
people every day, and anybody who wakes up with a hangover should
know it.  So they'll pitch in, "You know outside your disgusting
bubble of wine-drinkers, Mr Poisoner there is quite right, it's all
the same!"

We've got tons of this happening now.  I wouldn't have thought that
ontological crisis was a major national-security threat, because it
seemed so postmodern, theoretical, abstract and haute-literary, but
probably I should have known better.  Weird, off the wall stuff that
I personally enjoy tends to mainstream sooner or later.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #106 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 17 04:57

    

So, given that, what's the worst and most paralytic form of
"bullshit" where I'm really hip-deep in it, where I'm  deeply
implicated morally?  Probably it's "The Singularity."

Rapture of the Nerds, the Singularity.  A major literary hang-up for
science fiction writers of my generation.  Before us, nobody ever
heard of The Singularity. after us, everybody's gonna laugh at it. 
The Singularity as a sci-fi meme is gonna look a hundred times
sillier than Soviet Moon Colonies.   It's gonna look goofier than
jetpacks, robot butlers and flying cars.

I hasten to say that I don't blame Dr. Vernor Vinge for all this. 
Vernor is Mr Singularity, and though I always thought he was
probably wrong, I always thought it was a really useful and
interesting science-fictional literary problem.  I was grateful that
he analyzed the concept.  I've written novels where things happen
that are more-or-less Singularities.  It's really a cool and
provocative literary concept.  

It's just that, as a business model, as public policy, The
Singularity is a disastrous way to think.  It's "bullshit" in the
dark-side sense that it allows you to do all kinds of awful crap,
that you can "justify" by saying, "Donald Trump?!  I thought we'd
all be downloaded cyborg immortals by now!"  It was a way to
jettison ethical, legal, moral and civilizational implications by
pointing at an exponential graph and saying, "never mind, tomorrow's
Oz."  No, tomorrow isn't Oz.  Tomorrow's always now, if you wait
long enough.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #107 of 198: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Mon 9 Jan 17 05:35

    <scribbled by gberg Mon 9 Jan 17 05:41>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #108 of 198: Gary Greenberg (gberg) Mon 9 Jan 17 05:43

    
Might be useful here to remember the distinction between bullshit
and lies, as articulated by our foremost (and perhaps only)
philosopher of bullshit, Harry Frankfurt,as articulated in his
indispensable book, "On Bullshit." 

"Bullshit is unavoidable whenver circumstances require someone to
talk without knowing what he is talking about. Thus the production
of bullshit is stimulated whenever a person's obligations or
opportunities to speak about some topic exceed his knowledge of the
facts relevant to that topic."

And as for the the bullshitter, he "stands neither on the side of
the true nor on the side of the false. His eyes are not on the facts
at all, as the eyes of the honest man and the liar are, except
insofar as they may be pertinent to his interest in getting away
with what he says."

So bullshit requires a kind of innocence (or amorality), meaning
that the guy who concocts the wine is a liar, while the guy who
concocts the singularity is not. What is inherently subversive about
the bullshitter is that he vacates the clause in the social contract
that says that truth matters. Give me a lying, conniving Cheney any
day over a Trump who just doesn't give a rat's ass. As for the guy
who is hip-deep in the singularity, I'm guessing that if evidence
builds up that it is not going to happen or that it makes lousy
social policy or whatever, he will acknowledge it. I mean, if he's
not just a bullshitter he will. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #109 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:17

    
Science fiction may be "fiction" as opposed to "fact," but the
ontology of science fiction inspires a mythology, a system of
beliefs now firmly embedded in the collective psyche.  How many of
us assume that time travel is possible, that the future includes
warp speed space travel, sentient machines, bad fashion, etc.? Okay,
bad fashion is a given - but those other things are dubious but
persistent ideas now widely assumed as probabilities.  "But what
about space travel, aren't we already spending time in space?" In
fact, there's evidence that humans don't handle long-term space
experience well. We may assume that innovative development of space
environments will facilitate travel to other planets in the solar
system; certainly there's a viable plan for travel to Mars. But we
can't be certain that travel outside the solar system is likely, and
warp speed travel is fantasy at this point - extremely unlikely.  

Cyberpunk science fiction at least focused on probable futures - the
focus being more local, more on computers and enhancement tech than
space travel or time travel.  Cyberpunk was so compelling that, in
the 90s, there was a cyberpunk sub-movement of people who took Case,
Gibson's drug addict cyberspace hacker, as a role model. Raves
looked like parties Michael Moorcock might've written.  To the
extent science fiction predicted computer networks, it was spot on.
That "high tech low life" meme wasn't beyond probability, or even
beyond reach.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #110 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:26

    
"Give me a lying, conniving Cheney any day over a Trump who just
doesn't give a rat's ass."

If that's the choice, we're screwed.  But I suspect our politicians
and leaders were always worse than we could imagine - the difference
now being that, with the Internet and the prevalence of
surveillance/sousveillance models, you can't hide.  Interesting that
you don't necessarily have to: Clinton/Lewinsky was a scandal that
almost brought a disgraceful end to  that presidency, but Trump's
been elected despite arguable worse revelations about his actions
and character.  We're desensitized, perhaps, or somehow influenced
by the Assassin's Creed: "nothing is true, everything is permitted."

The USA as a whole could do with a crash course in ethics, and
another in civics. Unless we've decided to be the post-ethical USA.
That's a bad scene, because ethics are like glue that hold us
together. Without some commitment to ethics, however spotty, we
devolve, lose our grounding... we just fall apart.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #111 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:32

    
Jerry Michalski, who describes himself as "pattern finder, lateral
thinker, Gladwellian connector, facilitator and explorer of the
interactions between technology, society and business," has been in
the process of analyzing the Trump victory and "now what?" in a
series of six videos, five of which he's completed. They're on
Youtube as a playlist:
https://youtu.be/VSf74xywf0I?list=PLreQNsM8LqWCPG-tdl37UwkBSo26X8pGc
I haven't seen any better analysis. Looking forward to the sixth
video: "What now?"
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #112 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:40

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 9 Jan 17 07:40>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #113 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:40

    
One last quick note for the morning...

<102> Reminded me of a path I'd gone down before, realizing that
human history is a history of media.  See
https://youtu.be/kpiPv8bs1Ug (~5 minute video).

(Bruce and I once had a disagreement over my contention that
bonfires could be considered "dead media: - I think I was inspired
by
this: http://www.sacred-texts.com/pag/frazer/gb06205.htm )
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #114 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:49

    
http://csi.asu.edu/imaginary-college/

Thinking along the lines of some of your comments above
Bruce...how's ASU's Imaginary College going? A great idea, is it
working?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #115 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:52

    
Star War's is a great example of creating a modern mythology -
ontology, if you will. The power of media, memes and buzz and their
combination to go viral has a short term impact...But I wonder if
it's just this week's cyber fix and then it's on to the next....none
of this stuff seems to sink in, no one really explores it - just
exploits it....But it all sits in the background of our
consciousness, bubbling away, til someone hooks it with another
viral thread and knits and pearls more ontological  bullshit. Quite
a web we are weaving.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #116 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 17 07:56

    
So, "weapons of mass distraction"...given all this bullshit and now
the advent of VR and the rush to go to other realities it seems like
one of the most fundamental areas to focus on is getting a grip on
our own realities---individually.

I can't get from Here to There if I don't really know where my Here
is. That seems to be the modern Angst. That and the pace or
'acceleration' - this week's buzz word.

How do you and Jon stay in focus? Tips and tricks, or do we all just
have to figure this out for ourselves - what works for us?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #117 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 17 08:00

    
The Mundane Singularity:
http://www.nextbigfuture.com/2017/01/where-has-and-where-will-mundane.html?utm
_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+blogspot%2Fadvancednan
o+%28nextbigfuture%29

Guess we are supposed to just accept a Singularity and now we can
give it adjectives. Lovely. And, this, from Next Big Future !!
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #118 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 17 08:05

    
38 minutes with Frank Diana and Gerd Leonhard podcast:

Our theme was reimagining the future and the topics ranged from
artificial intelligence to exponential progression. ..

Gerd's newest book, Technology vs Humanity begins with a discussion
on ethics...pertinent these days:

http://www.techvshuman.com/
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #119 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 17 01:00

    
*Here's Google DeepMind boasting about what their deep-learners are
up to lately, which is a lot of quirky stuff weirdly scattered all
over the conceptual map, in a standard Google fashion.

*There's no question that they can play the hell out of a game of
Go.

https://deepmind.com/blog/deepmind-round-up-2016/
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #120 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 17 01:32

    
"From Scott Karl, via email:

"Hi guys, always love this discussion to start off the year. I've
been living in Asia for seven years now (Korea for four, China for
three), and I'm constantly shocked how much western media seems to
drink the Kool-Aid about the wonders of Asia in general and China in
particular. From here, China is a complete mess that is teetering on
the brink of collapse…"

*This idea of China as a giant fake Potemkin village always
interests me hugely.  There must be something to it.  It's surely
true that China literally stinks from life-threatening pollution and
its managerial class is keen to smuggle out money and escape to some
place less dismal. Plus, the Chinese copy stuff, steal stuff, engage
in huge official frauds, cover up scandals with digital censorship,
etc etc.

*But was there ever a time when life in China wasn't scary?  The
everyday quality of life has never been great in China, and by their
own interior standards they seem to be doing remarkably well.  I've
been over to China, and just as Scott says, I've seen peculiar
infrastructural things such as towering urban overpasses shimmed up
with bits of plywood.  To American eyes, the moral effect of this
infrastructural shoddiness is, just as he says, really shocking. 
But those highways do exist.  They're not made of smoke and mirrors,
that is millions of tons of cement and steel.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #121 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 17 01:32

    

*Objectively speaking, the Chinese have astronauts.  A manned space
station, next decade (probably the only one that will exist). 
They've got Tencent and Weibo.  They do megatons of the world's
basic manufacturing. They're militarily terraforming the South China
Sea in complete defiance of every other country in the world.  Does
that sound like the behavior of a paper dragon? Is it plausible to
think there's no there-there?

*Probably it's like the Italian "political crisis."  Once you're
inside Italy, you slowly realize that, though by anybody else's
standards it really is a deep and serious and chronic "crisis," by
Italian standards it's never a crisis unless they're actively
shooting each other.   The Italian cities are pre-Westphalian. They
don't really do "national government" as such a thing should get
done.  Italians have got national institutions that look like
tough-guy armor but are really more like support-hose and bustiers,
a kind of political lingerie.

*But that doesn't mean Italy doesn't exist.  Italy is a major G-7
power.  Unlike China, Italy is the kind of garden-like peninsula
where hordes of rich guys rush in to live.  
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #122 of 198: Matt DeCata (dekeita) Tue 10 Jan 17 01:37

    
Dear Bruce and The Well Community,

First let me say, that this site seems rather archaic, which I
imagine is because it's slightly older then I am. But nonetheless I
ended up here, as a millennial, of course through a series of
youtube videos that lead to me reading the transcript from your 2010
talk on our current "atemporal" era. I found this interesting for
two reasons. One, because obviously I agree with you. And secondly
because you offered the prediction that it would only last 10 years
or so. 

As it happens, I know what comes next. The era of consilience.
Marked by the unification of our spheres of knowledge. Which starts
with metaphysics. And while that entails questions that have been
pondered for thousands of years, my suggestion is that at heart the
answer is simple, and always has been. The world really exists, and
we perceive it imperfectly. Every question contains two parts, the
aspect of reality you're questioning and the person asking the
question. The perceived ontological difficulty comes from the second
half, understanding yourself. 

I've taken the first step of exploring this further here. 

http://www.consilience.us.com/the-role-of-information-on-life-and-society/

But honestly, the reason I'm writing now is mostly because I am a
nobody. Whatever the reason is, that I can see all of this before
anyone else has, its not because I'm smarter then everyone else.
It's not because I have access to something everyone else doesn't.
One factor could be that I've never really found a extended
community that I fit in with for long. But that's especially
problematic now, because my only goal is to find people of diverse
specialties who are like-minded enough with me to understand what
I'm saying, and take it further then I can. 

One other factor is certainly having grown up with the internet. So
I guess its fitting that I'd come back here to the primordial soup
to see this through. And well, I guess I just want to hear what you
and everyone else hear thinks about all this. 

Thanks for your time.

-Matt
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #123 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:32

    
Is government broken? Perhaps too broad an assumption, and probably
safer to say that politics is broken and government keeps chugging
along, despite political wrangling. I rarely hear informed
perspectives about "broken government," more often ill-informed
hearsay. 

It might be safer to say that government is not always responsive,
certainly not agile, and probably in ways "rather archaic," in the
sense that <dekeita> used that description for the WELL.  How do you
improve government, and the mechanisms of governance? "Slash and
burn" is merely destructive: you need thoughtful consideration of
goals and priorities that make sense for the 21st century .
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #124 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:32

    
Last night I participated in a workshop session led by experiential
futurist Jake Dunagan, formerly of the Institute for the Future and
its Governance Futures Lab, and currently Director of Design Futures
at verynice design.  Jake used a methodology created to help ad hoc
groups of social inventors brainstorm new models for governance. The
methodology is included in "An Inventor's Toolkit" that you can see
at http://www.iftf.org/uploads/media/GovFuturesLab_Toolkit.pdf The
idea is that you can take this toolkit to any sort of group
anywhere, run the process, and leverage crowd creativity in
imagining solutions. As Jake and I discussed afterward, it's not
quite clear how to leverage deliverables from these diverse groups
to produce something usable, but if nothing else, it's a great way
to get people to think about the complexity of governance, and the
difficulty in finding workable solutions.  (Side note: 
bureaucracies were built for efficiency; they may seem inefficient
because they're handling so much complexity. Solutions to the
stickier issues of governance are hard to conceive and harder to
implement. )
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #125 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:33

    
Jake's process, after setup, has four steps: investigate, re-think,
design, and prototype. The toolkit is a set of cards that bring
structure to this brainstorming process. Jake didn't use the cards,
since we had to follow an abbreviated version of the methodology.
Rather, he guided us, starting by proposing that cities may well be
the logical seat of effective governance going forward, with less
emphasis on state and national levels of organizations. There's
precedent in city-states of the past.  Given this, he asked us to
conceptualize Austin as a seat of governance that has seceded from
Texas and the USA and operates as an independent, autonomous entity.
We created a list of values that we associate with Austin's culture,
then broke out as teams, each team selecting one of the values
(local, creativity, openness/inclusive, curiosity, prosperity,
balance, fitness/health, futuristic, and freedom). 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #126 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:33

    
Each team followed the Toolkit process, which includes four steps:
* Investigate (understand the context of change/challenges)
* Re-think (make foundational assumptions explicit)
* Design (create systemic responses or solutions)
* Prototype (build, test, improve designs)

The deliverable for each team is a pitch that has five parts:
* State the name you've given  your team, your guiding value, two
"truths" about the culture relative to the value you're considering,
and a challenge/complaint you addressed.
* A response or solution to the challenge or complaint.
* How it would work.
* How it might fail.
* What could we do today to make this vision happen?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #127 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:34

    
I worked on the balance team. We called ourselves the
"Teeter-Totters," an acknowledgement that balance is hard, that
weights shift from one side to another. This has an impact on
governance, and in a context where balance is valued, the challenge
is to make informed decisions given the constant shifting from one
side to another. For instance, in Austin you have new urbanization
vs neighborhood groups, or developers vs no-growth
environmentalists. The best solutions for the city would require a
degree of compromise or balance, how do you achieve that?

Austin has a City Council with ten members, each representing a
geographical district, and constituencies that are diverse. This is
relatively new; before, Council members were elected at-large and
most of them represented West Austin neighborhoods - an inherent
imbalance, but less potentially chaotic than than the more chaotic
system of representation we have - which is better because it is
more democratic, more inclusive, but it also carries the challenge
of finding solutions and making decisions with diverse perspectives
represented - how can you bring those together?  Another issue is
that most members of the Council, as with any governing body, have
limited expertise - they may be making decisions about issues they
don't completely understand.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #128 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 08:34

    
Our solution: augment council governance with a mandated delegative
process. Significant decisions would be delegated to groups of
citizens selected for their expertise, and they would decide the
solution, or at least provide informed support.

Potential failure points: the process could be unwieldy, and could
take too much time where urgent solutions are required. 

How to make this happen? We'd have to present it to the Council, and
before that, we should seek champions at City Hall, hopefully
including the mayor and his staff. 

That hopefully gives a sense of the process. We could no doubt use
more of this kind of brain wrangling, especially if we can follow it
with effective process to create innovative governance models.  And
I agree that innovation at the city level is the most practical and
likely to succeed. Governance at scale is difficult, which is why
our current system separates State power from Federal power in the
USA. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/States'_rights] It's
controversial, of course, where the lines should be drawn.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #129 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 10 Jan 17 12:24

    

i dunno, jon, always debbie downer here. i commend you to gray brechin's
'imperial san francisco' (among other things, about the global resource and
trade dependencies of great cities) and remind you what the US was like
during the yrs of the articles of confederation and that blue-state nyc gets
its water from red-state upstate ny.

resources, interdependence, and trade --- hard messy non-theoretical devil-
is-in-the-details operational constraints.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #130 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 10 Jan 17 13:05

    
One week down and one week still to go!!!

For those of you reading this from the WWW please address your
questions, comments, etc to inkwell@well.com and we will post them
for you here.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #131 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 17 14:25

    
<loris>: I'm not necessarily advocating, and I don't think Jake was,
either. There are lots of possibilities. Just prior to the meetup,
Jake posted this link to the event page on Facebook:
http://io9.gizmodo.com/12-futuristic-forms-of-government-that-could-one-day-ru
-1589833046 That's a dozen possible future approaches to government. As Jake pointed out, we're well into #11, "Dark enlightenment." 

"If a band of wingnut anarcho-capitalists get their way, we'll take
one step forward by overthrowing liberal democracy — and then take
two steps back by re-instating a monarchist or authoritarian
system."

Actually referring not to Trump, but to the "Neoreactionary
Movement": http://rationalwiki.org/wiki/Neoreactionary_movement

"Hostility to modernity and democracy is the main point of agreement
among neoreactionaries. Moldbug writes that 'a reactionary is a
believer in order, stability, and security. All of which he treats
as synonyms ... Thus, the order that the rational reactionary seeks
to preserve and/or restore is arbitrary. Perhaps it can be justified
on some moral basis. But probably not. It is good simply because it
is order, and the alternative to order is violence at worst and
politics at best. If the Bourbons do not rule France, someone will –
Robespierre, or Napoleon, or Corner Man.'"
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #132 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Tue 10 Jan 17 20:29

    
From Stefan Jones, via email:

RE science fiction and The Singularity:

Twenty years ago this spring I was between the grind of grad school
and the grind of a new career. I was reveling in the free time and
the heady Dot Com Boom zeitgeist. Spent the time writing game
material, contributing the bruces' Dead Media Project, reading WIRED
and mainlining the still-young Web as best I could via Dial-Up. And
I went, for what would be the last time, to the campus SF convention
I used to help run. They managed to snag Vernor Vinge as GOH.
Another alumni board member and I had great fun BSing with him in
the green room.

The next day there was a panel talk about The Singularity. Besides
Vinge, and another guest I've forgotten, we had Frederik Pohl. He
wrote what was arguably the first SF story to hint at the
Singularity, the dizzying "Day Million," a snarky story about a
metal-skinned cyborg and a prenatally transgendered otter-woman who
meet, fall in love, and then part ways never to see each other again
but not before trading profiles so they can boff in VR.

Pohl asked, before the panel begun, "what IS this Singularity
thing?"

I explained it.

His reaction -- close paraphrasing:

"What a load of *crap*. Let me tell you what's going to happen.
We're going to be stuck on this planet. We're going to run the
environment and deplete the resources, and the survivors will
bitterly regret it and despise us for letting it happen."

Man, what THAT profoundly uncomfortable, with Vinge sitting five
feet away.

But man . . . Pohl had, by this time, seen plenty of stupid faddish
shit run through the SF community. Technocracy, Dianetics, Psionics,
L-5 colonies. You had to take that kind of perspective seriously.

Stefan Jones
sej@aol.com
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #133 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 00:49

    
Italy now suffering a quite strange cyberintrusion scandal where
some unknown Italian technician, who seems to be a modest
middle-class Roman engineer, Mason and real estate speculator, got
his hands on a "Remote Access Tool" called "EyePyramid." He then
proceeded to deftly spearphish almost all the top people in the
Italian government.  He's been reading their email since 2008,
apparently.

And so has his big sister, who apparently was in on this
individual's weird surveillance hobby.

There's about a hundred centipede shoes left to drop in the scandal
here.  Why did he do it?  Was he working for anybody else?  Is he a
spy, a crook, what?   What gives with the Masonic angle (because
Masonic conspiracy groups are actually quite big in Italy -- the
"P2" Masonic cell of Licio Gelli was a huge, corrupt, and very
successful favor-trading racket). 

What benefit did he get from reading the email of  all these
bureaucrats (including the mayor of Turin, by the way) for ten solid
years?  He's in jail now, but what are they gonna do to him?  Etc
etc

If this reminds me of any other modern scandal, it's "Silk Road,"
where the incredible mastermind of a vast dark net Bitcoin narcotics
empire turns out to be a Texan solar-power engineer hiding out under
fake ID in a modest Californian apartment.  Signor Occhionero
("Black Eye," "Eye of Pyramid," there seems to be some continuity
here) may never see daylight again for an act so vast and daring,
but you have to wonder about a modern technological situation that
affords that kind of behavior.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #134 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 00:56

    
"Guccifer2.0" is likely a guy like Mr Occhionero.  The CIA likes to
pretend that he's been FSB all along, but I don't think he was. 
Guccifer1 was almost as hairy a hacker as Guccifer2, and obviously
he wasn't a Russian intelligence asset, he was a Rumanian taxi
driver.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guccifer

It wouldn't surprise me much if the FSB knows who Guccifer 2.0 is
and is reading his email.  Anybody can get spearphished.  

If you're a modern spymaster, what would you rather do -- bribe a
guy to become your secret agent, or just know everything that he's
doing with his Android and his Windows machine?  If you don't own
him, well, you can't give him assignments and orders, but if you
pown him, wow, that's sort of great.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #135 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 02:35

    


From: Matt DeCata (dekeita) Tue 10 Jan 2017 (01:37 AM)

"Dear Bruce and The Well Community,

"First let me say, that this site seems rather archaic, which I
imagine is because it's slightly older then I am."

*The WELL is flat-out archaic, actually.  The horseshoe crab of
digital media.  God bless 'em.

"But nonetheless I ended up here, as a millennial, of course through
a series of
youtube videos that lead to me reading the transcript from your 2010
talk on our current "atemporal" era. I found this interesting for
two reasons. One, because obviously I agree with you. And secondly
because you offered the prediction that it would only last 10 years
or so."

*Yeah, I think the Trump election probably put-paid to that
atemporal sensibility I was describing in speeches at art fairs. 
We're entering a different cultural mini-era now.  Instead of being
"atemporal," meaning "without a proper time or a sense of temporal
progress" it's more like "post-all-forms-of-truth." But you can see
pretty easily how the one sensibility emerged from the other.


"As it happens, I know what comes next. The era of consilience.
Marked by the unification of our spheres of knowledge."


*Y'know, Matt, I have the warmest possible feelings for this kind of
metaphysical handwaving.  Consilience, not a new idea for me.  I
even did a sci-fi story about ten years ago, where a character does
some modest consilience-riffing about the nature of ultimate
reality.  "Black Swan," it's called.

http://www.starshipsofa.com/blog/2016/03/02/starshipsofa-no-425-bruce-sterling
/
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #136 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 02:35

    

*With that said, I don't think your own personal consilience
riffing, about the underlying basic unity of physics, information,
life etc, is gonna get a lot of cultural legs in the next few years.
Why? Because, it's a cool brainy scifi idea among a million cool
scifi ideas.  It's not an actual cultural way of life.  You haven't
personified your idea.  You haven't identified it with a region or
some particular avant-garde of lived experience.

*Whereas the avant-garde of atemporality are pretty clear.  They're
Russian "hybrid warriors" in the Ukraine who are effectively
battling Ukrainians, and the European Union, by simply making up
imaginary Russian countries using Russian-language social media,
arms smuggling, and just fantastic billows of weaponized bullshit.  

*They've got a political message, but it's a very OODA-loop kind of
message.  "Are we the past?  Are we the Future?  Are we
antifascists, or Czarist costume players, or Russian Orthodox
religious crusaders, or secretly Communists?  Or are we regional
patriots, imperialists, Ukrainian blood and soil racists, the
Russian Lafayette Escadrille of Global Freedom From Capitalism? Are
we a floor wax, a desert topping, a ghost battalion, are we tools of
the FSB all along?  Etc. In an "atemporal" situation you want to
cultivate the ability to generate and shed those identities really
fast.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #137 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 02:36

    

*These are the culture heroes who've had the wind at their back
recently.  For a while.  In 2017, though, they're like a pack of
coyotes who caught a taxi four or five years ago. 

*Now they have to deal with the upshot of their victor.   Okay,
chameleon warlords -- you're gonna get away with your depredation.
NATO, Europe, the Trump regime, they won't lift a hand against you. 
So how are you gonna put food on the table and repair the potholes? 
Can the people of Donbass eat your crowdsourced velcro badges for a
living?  What kind of lived experience does your leadership actually
offer?

"Repeal, and Replace With Bullshit."   I'm thinking this is already
the bumper-sticker stuck to the Trump Administration, too.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #138 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 02:37

    

*This too will pass, though.  I'm thinking it's indeed possible for
some knowledge-unifying "consilience" to emerge out of these
contemporary mists of deliberate confusion.  That could happen. 
But, given people's demonstrated behavior worldwide, I have to doubt
it will be rational and scientific in its basis.  It won't be made
up by American techie guys who have a coder, engineering,
solutionist mindset.

*No, it looks to me like we're entering a rather mystical Ghost
Dance and Witch-Hunt era, the kind of cultural circumstances where a
new world religion might arise.  The Middle East is in such a
starkly dreadful condition now that maybe they'll find it in their
bowels, once again, to invent something huge and unheard-of.  The
proverbial Yeatsian dark beast to shamble toward Bethlehem.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #139 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 17 03:50

    
*I know that a brother-sister pair of Masons spying on the
government of Italy sounds like something out of bonkers Illuminati
paranoia, but, well, my working conjecture is that they just liked
to do it 'cause they could.

https://apnews.com/f4819bd348544ca19e070d1251a8c1fc

*They seem to have been a tad careless with their servers, so
imagine somebody just stumbling over and archive of everything they
grabbed and Wikileaking all that.  Why wouldn't they?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #140 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 17 15:07

    
I do like that term "architrope," though I have a bit of difficulty
aligning the root words with the "transitional space" definition.
The concept made me think of the TAZ (temporary autonomous zone):
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Temporary_Autonomous_Zone I have that
book in hand at the moment, subtitled "Ontological anarchy, poetic
terrorism."  Hakim Bey, aka Peter Lamborn Wilson, describes the TAZ
as a conscious radical tactic, and says that "the apparatus of
Control - the 'State' - must... continue to deliquesce and petrify
simultaneously, must progress on its present course in which
hysterical rigidity comes more and more to mask a vacuity, an abyss
of power. As power 'disappears,' our will to power must be
disappearance."

As Wikipedia says at that link, "The book describes the
socio-political tactic of creating temporary spaces that elude
formal structures of control." Burning Man was/is a TAZ, no doubt
the best known and largest realization of the concept.

You can read the book here: https://hermetic.com/bey/taz_cont

Transitional spaces and autonomous zones could probably be essential
contexts for a re-imagining of the human project; where else is this
sort of thing happening? Is Casa Jasmina a current or potential TAZ?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #141 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 17 02:10

    
https://www.dni.gov/files/images/globalTrends/documents/GT-Main-Report.pdf

*Well, here's the latest trendspotting pitch from the USA's
intelligence directorate: "Global Trends: Paradox of Progress."

*I tend to read these public spook reports.  I've even come to
almost enjoy their inside-the-Beltway mandarin prose style.

*There's one thing you can always depend on in these intelligence
reports: the American intelligence community itself is never a
hazard to American national security.  Obviously they've screwed up
a whole lot lately, but they never put their own disastrous
misjudgments front and center.  No they always cling to their
ambience of being clear-headed and objectively on-top-of-things,
even though, in a lot of ways, the world's second-oldest profession
has a lot of the same institutional problems as newspapers and news
magazines.  The spooks used to be in a situation where they knew
almost everything unfit to print, but now, even though they're still
fact-oriented, they have far less institutional credibility and
clearly just don't understand what's going on.

*There's a distinct air of institutional defeat in this particularly
report.  It's as if the American intelligence agencies were all
brothers of Andrei Karlov, aware that they may be shot in the back
in an art gallery, and slowly coming to the realization that nobody
will gonna miss 'em all that much.   With Trump elected, "their
idols are dead and their enemies are in power."  The year 2017 is
gonna be a dismal time to be an American spy.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #142 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 17 02:11

    

*On its largest scale, this report describes "Old big in big cities
afraid of the sky," which is what the world of the mid 2iC is pretty
much bound to look like, short of a huge black swan such as nuclear
war, climate collapse, mass epidemics, or the always-popular
Screaming Meteor of Death.

*But the authors also cook up three rather entertaining futurist
scenarios, "Islands," "Orbits" and "Communities."  Meaning
disintegrative nationalism, regional power-blocs, and maybe new
global-scale agreements.

*They're not bad as scenarios go.  Probably, as with most scenarios,
all three of them ail happen at once.  

If you're and footloose, you're gonna live in "Communities:" only
it's an elite community, something like Davos plus Panama money
laundries.   

If you're getting by, you're in "Orbits," where you're grateful for
a flag, health insurance and a mortgage.

Lastly, if you're in a frozen conflict zone, a hot war, a state
under economic sanctions or any luckless place that even smells like
Muslim belt-bombs, you're an inhabitant of "Islands."
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #143 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 17 03:04

    
    
http://csi.asu.edu/imaginary-college/

Thinking along the lines of some of your comments above
Bruce...how's ASU's Imaginary College going? A great idea, is it
working?
  
*They're doing okay in their science-fiction/scholastic activities
Arizona State University, or they were last time I checked.  

*I wrote a story for one of their fiction collections.  An
interesting set of conceptual problems there.

http://hieroglyph.asu.edu/story/tall-tower/
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #144 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 17 03:07

    
The Arthur C. Clarke Center for Human Imagination, hosted at
University of California San Diego, is also going gangbusters along
that line.  Here's a new anthology they sponsored, edited by David
Brin, which features original fiction by me and also William Gibson,
among other glittering genre luminaries.

http://www.davidbrin.com/chasing.html

By the way, the year 2017 is the centenary of Sir Arthur C. Clarke. 
The first science fiction writer I ever met personally.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #145 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 12 Jan 17 04:24

    
Conclusion of this year's Global Risks Report from WEF:
(http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GRR17_Report_web.pdf)

"The 12th edition of The Global Risks
Report is published at a time when
deep-rooted social and economic
trends are manifesting themselves
increasingly disruptively across the
world. Persistent inequality, particularly
in the context of comparative global
economic weakness, risks
undermining the legitimacy of market
capitalism. At the same time,
deepening social and cultural
polarization risks impairing national
decision-making processes and
obstructing vital global collaboration. 

Technology continues to offer us the
hope of solutions to many of the
problems we face. But the pace of
technological change is also having
unsettling effects: these range from
disrupting labour markets through
automation to exacerbating political
divisions by encouraging the creation
of rigid communities of like-minded
citizens. We need to become better at
managing technological change, and
we need to do it quickly

Above all, we must redouble our efforts
to protect and strengthen our systems
of global collaboration. Nowhere is this
more urgent than in relation to the
environment, where important strides
have been made in the past year but
where much more remains to be done.
This is a febrile time for the world. We
face important risks, but also
opportunities to take stock and to work
together to find new solutions to our
shared problems. More than ever, this
is a time for all stakeholders to
recognize the role they can play by
exercising responsible and responsive
leadership on global risks"

Lovely collection of colorful inforgraphics, but nothing new. Same
old, same old. Only thing for sure, as Leon Russell might sing ...
there's going to be a shootout on the Plantation.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #146 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 12 Jan 17 05:11

    
It's a precarious world out there, especially for the proletariat.
So they get a new word 'precariat'. 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Precariat
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #147 of 198: Matt DeCata (dekeita) Thu 12 Jan 17 07:22

    
@jon I asked a friend to come up with a single word for the "edge of
chaos" And he suggested "archichaos" archi meaning the beginning, I
believe, but it also has a connotation or use as meaning like "the
master of". But I changed it to architropy, to align with entropy.
And then noticed there was some usage of architrope in a similar way
so it seemed right.

@bruce Thanks for the input. Of course, yah consilience isn't a new
idea. I spend a lot of time wondering if im ever saying anything
even slightly original. And then if not why what I'm saying isn't
already in use to address problems like economics. But of course
that process is itself a reflection of architropy. I mean I couldn't
possibly ever say something meaningful wholly disconnected from the
history of the English language, science, etc. But the exact order
that words, and concepts, etc are used makes a difference.

I'm going to have to think a lot about your comments on
"personifying the idea" though. Because of course I write from the
perspective of an American techy, I'm not saying my perspective is
solely right, just that it is consistent with a broader and more
complete view. So I give a solutionist view to questions asking for
solutions.

But lately I'm much more interested in the art of it all, and that's
something I want to explore.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #148 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 12 Jan 17 07:58

    
http://callingbullshit.org/syllabus.html
Introduction to bullshit
Spotting bullshit
The natural ecology of bullshit
Causality
Statistical traps
Visualization
Big data
Publication bias
Predatory publishing and scientific misconduct
The ethics of calling bullshit.
Fake news

'bout covers it
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #149 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 12 Jan 17 11:11

    
Someone had to quip this well before me:

Welcome to the post-truth world; if you post it, it must be true.
https://www.facebook.com/ted.c.newcomb/posts/1205604269526685?notif_t=like&not
if_id=1484229466124728
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #150 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 12 Jan 17 11:24

    
nyer cartoon about the importance of a miminimalist home aesthetic
at the end of the world:

http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/the-life-changing-magic-of-declu
ttering-in-a-post-apocalyptic-world
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #151 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 17 12:07

    
If you want to get a better sense of the world, read GlobalVoices:
https://globalvoices.org/  Here's a sampling:

Digital activists are disappearing in Pakistan:
https://globalvoices.org/2017/01/12/digital-activists-are-disappearing-in-paki
stan/

"... reports are emerging from families and civil rights
organizations that as many as nine Pakistani bloggers went missing
within the first week of 2017. Four of the missing activists are
known for their secular and left-leaning views."

Kenyans fear a possible Internet shutdown during their 2017
presidential election:
https://globalvoices.org/2017/01/12/kenyans-fear-a-possible-internet-shutdown-
during-2017-presidential-election/

"Kenyans online have started expressing fears of a possible shutdown
of social media by the government in the run up to the 2017
presidential elections, set to take place in the month of August."
(Such a shutdown in the USA would've put @realDonaldTrump out of
business...)

Ukraine bans Russia's one independent TV station:
https://globalvoices.org/2017/01/12/ukraine-bans-russias-one-independent-tv-st
ation/

"According to a press release posted on the council's website, the
decision to ban Dozhd, the last remaining Russian TV station
licensed to be broadcast in Ukraine, was made after the channel
aired two films on December 31, 'Faster than Rabbits' and 'What Else
Do Men Talk About?', which popularized 'the law enforcement agencies
of the aggressor-state [Russia].'"
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #152 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 17 12:14

    
The press pool at Trump Tower happened to notice that Marine Le Pen
was hanging out there, sipping coffee:
https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2017/01/what-is-marine-le-pen-doi
ng-at-trump-tower/512951/ 

Neither Trump's people, nor Le Pen's, say the two were scheduled to
meet. Maybe she thinks the Trump tower has better coffee than
France? 

"The visit comes at an important time for Le Pen, who is scheduled
to officially launch her presidential campaign next month in Lyon
and who is expected to reach the second round of the presidential
election this year. Le Pen is one of the clarion voices of the
European nationalist right, and has in recent years made efforts to
reform her party’s xenophobic image in a 'de-demonization'
campaign."

Trump has a convincing argument by now that demons are really okay
to have around; no "de-demonization" necessary this side of the
pond.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #153 of 198: Jeffrey Vagle (jvagle) Thu 12 Jan 17 12:40

    
Le Pen and Lombardi stopping to have coffee in Trump Tower (before
Hollande has set foot in the place) is not likely to go unnoticed by
France, Germany, and the UK, who could read this as a signal of
US-Russia alignment along far-right lines and US meddling in their
domestic affairs. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #154 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 17 13:05

    
*Getting up to speed with European digital politics.  Even most
Europeans never get wind of this stuff.


=======================================================================
5. EDRi.org: Best of 2016
=======================================================================

One of EDRi's goals for 2016 was to reach a wider audience and raise
awareness of the digital rights issues. As it turns out, with the
help
of our members and supporters, we were successful! Our blogposts and
articles were read widely, and our most popular publication was
downloaded more than 23 000 times. Here is a selection of the most
read
articles.

Net neutrality wins in Europe!
We are not able to report on positive policy developments as often
as we
would like. However, we were happy to report that the new net
neutrality
guidelines from the Body of European Regulators for Electronic
Communications (BEREC) confirmed strong protection for net
neutrality
and for the free and open internet. Readers were just as excited as
we
were: this was our most read article in 2016.
Read the blogpost here:
https://edri.org//net-neutrality-wins-europe/

Big Brother Awards Belgium: Facebook is the privacy villain of the
year
Our readers appreciated the news on the Belgian Big Brother Awards
2016,
where the negative prize for the worst privacy abuser was
unanimously
granted to Facebook for harvesting and generating personal data from
people all around the world, particularly in the context of the
acquisition of WhatsApp. Recent news from the European Commission
show
that we were not alone in our concerns.
Read the blogpost here: https://edri.org//bba-belgium-2016/

-----------------------------------------------------------------
Support our work with a one-off-donation!
https://edri.org/donate/
-----------------------------------------------------------------

New copyright directive fails at every level
There were some legislative proposals worse than others, but the
queen
of all was the Copyright Directive. It includes a proposal to
potentially filter all uploads to the internet in Europe – a
provision
that would require internet companies to block uploads of perfectly
legal material.
Read the press release here:
https://edri.org//press-release-new-copyright-directive-fails-every-level/

Next year, you’ll complain about the Terrorism Directive
In December 2015, the European Commission proposed a Directive on
combating terrorism. The proposal was drafted in two weeks, with no
impact assessment. Since then, the legislative process has been
rushed
through. Provisions that undermine human rights online and offline
have
been added. Despite a difficult political environment, we did manage
to
achieve some successes in the Directive. We don’t give up and keep
pushing for human rights.
Read the blogpost here:
https://edri.org/enditorial-next-year-youll-complain-about-the-terrorism-direc
tive/

Your privacy, security, and freedom online are in danger
The EU has a chance to protect citizen's rights and freedoms in the
upcoming e-Privacy reform. At the same time, we want people to learn
about how to actively defend their privacy and to keep enjoying
their
freedoms. Our series of blogposts on privacy, security, and freedom
proved to be a success.
Read the blogpost series here:
https://edri.org/privacy-security-freedom/

New leaks confirm TiSA proposals that would undermine civil
liberties
Trade agreements pose potentially serious threats to freedom of
expression and protection of personal data of European citizens. In
November 2016, German blog Netzpolitik.org in association with
Greenpeace published leaked documents concerning the Trade in
Services
Agreement (TiSA). The documents confirmed that TiSA would undermine
civil liberties.
Read the blogpost here:
https://edri.org//new-leaks-confirm-tisa-undermine-civil-liberties/

Your guide to Digital Defenders
In 2016 we also witnessed an increase of downloads of our
publications.
A big success came with the privacy for kids booklet, which was
downloaded more than 23 000 times. The booklet will soon be
available in
many other languages, and so we expect the number to continue
rising.
Download the booklet in English here:
https://edri.org//files/privacy4kids_booklet_web.pdf
Download the booklet in other languages here:
https://edri.org/digital-defenders-help-kids-defend-their-privacy-around-europ
e/

Our other popular publications were, among others, booklets on data
protection and net neutrality.
Download the data protection booklet here:
https://edri.org//files/paper06_datap.pdf
Download the net neutrality booklet here:
https://edri.org//files/EDRi_NetNeutrality.pdf

(Contribution by Zarja Protner, EDRi intern)
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #155 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 17 03:52

    
*Investigations are continuing in the Occhionero Italian cyberspy
case.  Even though this is a super-contemporary case, and a clear
harbinger of things to come, and therefore of interest to a WELL
SOTW, I really dislike writing about computer crime suspects as if
they were already convicted.  It has an unethical witch-hunt
ambience.  The defendants are not proven guilty of anything.

*But man, are this brother and sister pair ever in all kinds of
trouble.  They'd be lots better off if they'd broken all four of
their thighbones.

*There's some suggestion that the Occhionero pair will claim that
they themselves are victims of hacking; that their computers were
penetrated and they themselves had no idea of the mayhem going on. 
I've seen that tried before in major computer crime cases.  You
might call that the "wasn't me, it was the Unknown Illuminati"
defense.  I don't think I've ever seen it work, except with
somebody's open wifi.

*Also, it's clear that whoever was doing this spy work was really
patient, really sly, really interested in the sort of things that
would interest a paranoid, snoopy Roman real-estate guy, and not
very technically skilled.  Why the sister was also arrested, that's
not clear yet.  I'm guessing that, like a lot of low-key geek guys
with an amazing secret life, he badly needed someone to confide in. 
The psychological pressure must have been terrifying.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #156 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 17 03:53

    

*On the plus side (if there is one) it appears that, although the
malefactors were using ten-year-old RAT remote-access malware, they
didn't actually use it for ten years.  They used it for more like a
year and a half, before the FBI caught on, because, for some reason,
they were spying on Italy from out of the USA.  I wouldn't have
picked that locale as a platform for intra-NATO raids, but, well,
there's no accounting for taste.

*Also, the Italian Mom entered the picture, because, being Italian,
she's still alive, though her kids are in their mid-forties.  She
points out in the Italian press that her kids drive used cars and
eat pizzas, they can barely afford to go on vacation.  Not exactly
the profile of high-end cyberthieves or foreign espionage assets.  

*Maybe they were really clever and hid their insider-trading money
in Delaware.  Due to centuries of practice, Italians can be
extremely good at money-laundering.  But even a guy with an IQ high
enough to boil water would be hard-put to spy on dozens or hundreds
of politicians, and also deftly cash-in, through running a two-man
operation.  How would the guy find the time?

*In any case, the Italian press and public seem much less frantic
than they were a few days ago.  The moral panic has faded quickly,
Andrei Karlov style.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #157 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 17 03:57

    

*In similar unbelievable modern-hacker news, "Guccifer 2.0," the
hacker who penetrated the Democratic National Committee and probably
dumped it to Wikileaks, is complaining that the CIA is libeling him
by claiming he's a Russian.  I frankly doubt that Guccifer is a
Russian or even in their pay.  The odds seem quite high that
Guccifer is basically just another Occhionero.   Occhionero is an
existence-proof that pretty much any patient, committed guy can pull
a Guccifer.

*I think that the CIA probably sincerely believes that he's Russian,
though.  If you're CIA it's existentially horrifying to think that a
no-nothing clean-skin non-threat like Occhionero can knock over
democratically elected governments.  With what?  Nothing more than a
little spearphishing and a bad attitude.  

*Far, far better, far less disturbing, if it really is a
peer-competitor intelligence agency.  In that case, you've still got
a reason to live.  To ask for funding.  Otherwise you're like an
elephant perishing from asymmetric, profoundly malarial mosquito
bites.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #158 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 17 03:58

    

*Also, who exactly isn't a Russian agent now?  Snowden's supposed to
Russian, Assange is supposed to be Russian, Trump is supposed to be
Russian, all of Trump's advisers are supposed to be Russian… how
plausible is all that?  Before the Trump election, nobody but cranks
would allege such things.

*If you go looking from some actual secret Russians, like, say, The
Vladimir's older daughter, it turns out Masha Putin is married to
some nice Dutch guy and living in The Netherlands.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #159 of 198: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Fri 13 Jan 17 22:41

    
From Brian Slesinsky, via email:

I'm wondering what our shiny new machine learning infrastructure
looks
like when it's become old and decrepit. This paper suggests that if
you start cutting back on maintenance, it might go downhill quickly:

"As a special case of glue code, pipeline jungles often appear in
data
preparation. These can evolve organically, as new signals are
identified and new information sources added. Without care, the
resulting system for preparing data in an ML-friendly format may
become a jungle of scrapes, joins, and sampling steps, often with
intermediate files output. Managing these pipelines, detecting
errors
and recovering from failures are all difficult and costly. Testing
such pipelines often requires expensive end-to-end integration
tests.
All of this adds to technical debt of a system and makes further
innovation more costly."&#65279;

Machine Learning: The High Interest Credit Card of Technical Debt
https://research.google.com/pubs/pub43146.html

What happens to a Stack when it becomes yesterday's news, starts
losing money, and talent heads elsewhere? Last year's big example
was
Yahoo, which shows what happens when you cut back on security. But
that was older tech, mostly.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #160 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 14 Jan 17 05:29

    
Virtual Design:
http://www.bitrebels.com/technology/virtual-architecture-reality-designers/?ut
m_source=feedburner&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+bitrebels+%28Bit+Reb
els%29

Kind of cool...we've come a long way from CadCam
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #161 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 17 07:11

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 14 Jan 17 07:13>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #162 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 17 07:13

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 14 Jan 17 07:13>
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #163 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 17 07:14

    
Sorry about those scribbles... trying to get the links right...

It's hard to resist focusing on the Trump election, and I suppose
the "state of the world" depends on it.  Journalists and comedians
are feasting. The world feels broken and uncertain, if you think
it's held together by national politics.

But people go on about their business, and the world is arguably
getting better for the crazy humans that are bounding across its
surfaces.  The Economist in September wrote "People are predisposed
to think that things are worse than they are, and they overestimate
the likelihood of calamity. This is because they rely not on data,
but on how easy it is to recall an example. And bad things are more
memorable. The media amplify this distortion. Famines, earthquakes
and beheadings all make gripping headlines; '40m Planes Landed
Safely Last Year" does not." This in a review of the book "Progress:
Ten Reasons to Look Forward to the Future" by historian Johan
Norberg.  
http://www.economist.com/news/books-and-arts/21706231-human-life-has-improved-
many-ways-both-recently-according-swedish-economic And I mentioned earlier the optimistic outlook of Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker - here's that link again: http://www.vox.com/2016/8/16/12486586/2016-worst-year-ever-violence-trump-terr
orism

I've studied and practiced journalism in the past, and I understand
why reporting is saturated with bad news inspiring fear, loathing,
doubt and pessimism.  It's a survival-enhancing characteristic of
the human species to scan for alerts, to be watching for danger -
and there's always plenty of that, too.  We've seen terrible wars,
famines, dictatorships, criminal conspiracies etc. Seeing the
prevalence and persistence of these manifestations of humanity's
darker side, it's hard to see progress and hope as present,
persistent, and viable. Especially if you're a victim, or if you
know victims; if your own life is weighted with tragedy. 

I'm hopeful when I consider something like the bodhisattva ideal in
Buddhism, which is personified in anyone who foregoes personal
'nirvana' to help others out of suffering.  However terrible humans
have been and can be to each other, to the planet, to its other
inhabitants - however prevalent the darkness - we also have
potential lightness of being, we have people who put compassion
ahead of self-interest.  I suppose it's most realistic to see a
balance in the world of pessimism and despair with optimism and
hope, and the best hope is that we find ways to help each other
out...
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #164 of 198: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Sat 14 Jan 17 07:55

    
It's certainly possible to build software that keeps working indefinitely
with no maintenance. But yeah, most people don't. Kids these days.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #165 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 17 08:26

    
Steven Levy:

"We will try to err on the side of accuracy. More than ever, we
believe that must be a reporter’s job in 2017."

https://backchannel.com/what-a-reporters-job-is-in-2017-a20e77457ca2#.olrkwret
i
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #166 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 17 08:41

    
From a useful interview with Joi Ito, who as Director of MIT's Media
Lab is what you might call a pragmatic futurist:

"People want a culture change, and this moment reminds me of the
beginning of punk rock, or the beginning of the hippie movement. But
I’d hate for Trump to be our millennial Sex Pistols or Timothy Leary
or the Beatles. We need something like the Beatles that captures the
hearts and minds of people. We’re ripe for a new cultural movement.
Culture movements and art and punk rock thrive under bad presidents.
The music was better under Reagan and Nixon than it was under Obama.
I think that the doomsday scenarios tend to promote the arts."

Also (re. compassion):

"I’ve been working closely with a monk named Tenzin Priyadarshi. We
teach a class together called Principles of Awareness. He used to
work with the Dalai Lama and Mother Teresa. He talks about
discipline and compassion. Compassion is just being able to be nice
to compassionate people you like. Discipline and compassion is to be
able to be compassionate and loving to people you hate or are
otherwise harming you. It’s something you’ve got to train. What I
want to do is take kids along a journey where they have a path to
nonviolence."

https://backchannel.com/joi-ito-explains-why-donald-trump-is-like-the-sex-pist
ols-943db42c9f47#.7h9qcba2n
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #167 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 17 09:11

    
*The Global Risks Report from the World Economic Forum.

http://www3.weforum.org/docs/GRR17_Report_web.pdf

*Yeah, I also read that thing.  Every year.  Also, I find it a lot
more credible than the similar patriotic effort from the United
States "intelligence community."

*The spooks are not a "community."  Too bad for them.  The planet's
Davos rich guys are much more a "community."  Too bad for us.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #168 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 14 Jan 17 13:50

    
LOL...*The spooks are not a "community."  Too bad for them.  The
planet's
Davos rich guys are much more a "community."  Too bad for us.

It irks me that they are such a rich resource of materials...I get a
lot of good stuff from WEF
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #169 of 198: Roland Legrand (roland) Sun 15 Jan 17 01:45

    
Not the WEF, but Human Rights Watch here: they just published a
lengthy report about populist demagogues.
End next week the mightiest nation on this planet will have a
president who suggests the use of torture, mass deportations and who
blocks unfriendly media.

In Europe we had Farage, the man who admitted happily that he lied
during the Brexit-debate, while Le Pen in France, Wilders in the
Netherlands and Grillo in Italy want to destroy the European project
which helped us live in peace and democracy for all those years.

Social media and comments sections in newspapers are overwhelmed by
people who, in their fear and uncertainty, embrace those populist
leaders and admire folks like Putin.

There is too little pushback by those who realize what's really
happening. It's not enough to preach to the choir. We should keep
discussing with the others, tell them their fears and the problems
they perceive are real, but that the solutions proposed by the
populists are fake.
https://www.hrw.org/news/2017/01/12/world-report-2017-demagogues-threaten-huma
n-rights
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #170 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 15 Jan 17 06:28

    
“There’s a danger on the internet that you think you’re
accomplishing something. So you see an article about a disease and
retweet it and think ‘It’s cured now!’ And you’ve fooled yourself
into thinking that you’ve done something productive.... I’m trying
to transition from making comments on social media to choosing one
or two organizations to work with and support so that I feel like
I’m actually being a positive part of the process. You don’t want to
be a crank.” 

~ Judd Apatow,
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/14/opinion/sunday/judd-apatow-freaking-out-ove
r-donald-trump.html
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #171 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 15 Jan 17 06:37

    
Newspaper comments sections are a whole nother story (excepting a
few cases like the NYT where they are moderated).  But if the lot of
ordinary people is fear and uncertainty, bad things will happen on
the political front, as we have just seen here in the US.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #172 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 15 Jan 17 15:44

    
<170> think that nails it Jon...We might get a few SOPA petitions
stopping things...but the real work is local, drudgery and time
consuming...it's not click
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #173 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:34

    
*Well, we're about to roll it up for 2017, and I've got to leave
town and head for the mountains for a few days.  So, I thought I'd
conclude with a few potentially useful musings.

https://voicerepublic.com/talks/digital-bauhaus-summit-2016-end-talk-luxury-co
mmunism-what-is-to-be-done

*Here I am hanging out on stage in Germany with some colleagues of
differing disciplines, thinking about radically different economic
models than the toxic one we've got.  "Luxury Communism" after a
universal income is somehow administered, that sort of thing. 

*Prominent among my colleagues is the late Mark "K-Punk" Fisher, a
talented intellectual who got into pop music and kinda graduated
into new-media, political theory, left-wing economics, etc.  A guy
whose sensibility was always grimmer than mine, but definitely a man
of my milieu.

*Mark had been struggling with depression since his teen years, but
it looks like 2016 finally got on top of him.  So Mark killed
himself.   

*Okay, don't do what he did.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #174 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:35

    

*If you're some brainy WELL fringe-pundit who is similarly upset
like Mark was, you should gain a few useful lessons from Mark's
action here.  Mark's on the gallery floor with Andrei Karlov, only
by his own hand, and, y'know, that did not improve our general
situation.  In fact, if Mark was still around now, he'd probably be
doing the same acerbic, melancholy stuff he'd been doing for
donkey's years, only he'd have more credibility and a bigger
audience.

*I'm not religious, so I'm not going to do all kinds of moral
finger-waving about Mark's willful act of ending his own life, but,
frankly, this should be judged as a vicious activity.  Think of the
host of young, vital guys who are driving jihad suicide trucks
nowadays.  Even if you think you're downing your Oxycontin for some
entirely different motive than these kamikazes, these guys are your
true contemporary colleagues.  In fact, they're your avant-garde and
you're a mere copycat by comparison.  You don't want to be
shoulder-to-shoulder with them.  They're not proper thought-leaders.


*The clock's gonna continue to tick, and some day this will all be
quaint period retrospect, just like our other WELL musings. 
Continuing to live, keeping your eyes and ears open, that's just a
better idea all around.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #175 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:35

    

https://thewalrus.ca/bring-on-the-flood/

*A critic really digging the dystopia here.  He jabs his thumb deep
in it when he declares that the true joy of the post-apocalypse is
getting today over with.  

*Okay, I get it why dystopia is popular now, but that is a genuinely
problematic sensibility.  Today really WILL be over with, it's
crumbling, we're gonna be knee-deep in the ruins of the
unsustainable.  However, we don't have to get all ruin-porn about
that.  Even if that is our cultural sensibility, we could up our
game and do it with better taste.

*Scary political disaster, Nazism, Fascism -- okay, a lot of people
simply lived through that historic period.  It didn't last all that
long.  In fact it was only melodramatic creeps like Hitler who
really thought it was a Thousand Year Reich that deserved to end in
a totalizing scorched-earth Gotterdammerung.  If you tremble all
over from a prospect like that, you're actually buying into the
worldview of the problem.

*Germany, Italy and Japan were all smoldering ruins in the 1940s and
quite lively, prosperous, inventive places in the 1960s.  Strange,
but true.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #176 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:35

    

https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603366/mathematical-model-reveals-the-patte
rns-of-how-innovations-arise/

*Finally, this one is just the awesome.  Man, if only the WELL SOTW
had some neat-o math hack that could describe the processes of
"innovation."  Yeah man, human culture, the new, the scope of
tomorrow; it's sedately dominated by scale-laws and probabilistics!

*Because it's the laws of physics!  It's Heap's Law, Zipf's Law, and
best of all, the "adjacent possible."  I love the Adjacent-Possible.
In fact, rather than ever living in a "utopia" or a "dystopia," I
think I've always lived in the "Adjacent-Possible."  That's my
spiritual zip-code.  In fact, whenever the Adjacent-Possible becomes
the actually possible, I get bored and move.  

*Then there's the Parable of the Urn Full of Balls here, which, as a
sometime popular-science writer, I also really like.  There's this
Urn, see, and you know it's got only room for so many Balls in it,
and the Balls are of different colors.  So, every once in a while
you get to pull out a Ball and observe it.  You can empirically
judge its color, and then you wonder -- okay, what color is the next
ball gonna be?

But it turns out -- and this is awesome -- there's a way to see into
the Urn's opaque walls.  They involve cool statistical effects with
a special breed of urn,  "Polya's Urn of Innovation Triggering!"  

*And, you know, here at the Well State of the World, that's
obviously what we've been mutely trying to do all along.  We've got
ourselves a homemade Modified Polya's Urn of Innovation Triggering
going on here.  "Cause it's all about us tossing in balls and trying
to pick out associated new ones.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #177 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:36

    

*Our author explains:

https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603366/mathematical-model-reveals-the-patte
rns-of-how-innovations-arise/

"That’s because the Polya Urn model allows for all the expected
consequences of innovation (of discovering a certain color) but does
not account for all the unexpected consequences of how an innovation
influences the adjacent possible.

"So Loreto, Strogatz, and co have modified Polya’s urn model to
account for the possibility that discovering a new color in the urn
can trigger entirely unexpected consequences. They call this model
'Polya’s urn with innovation triggering.'

"The exercise starts with an urn filled with colored balls. A ball
is withdrawn at random, examined, and replaced in the urn.

"If this color has been seen before, a number of other balls of the
same color are also placed in the urn. But if the color is new -- it
has never been seen before in this exercise -- then a number of
balls of entirely new colors are added to the urn.

"Loreto and co then calculate how the number of new colors picked
from the urn, and their frequency distribution, changes over time.
The result is that the model reproduces Heaps’ and Zipf’s Laws as
they appear in the real world -- a mathematical first. 

“The model of Polya’s urn with innovation triggering, presents for
the first time a satisfactory first-principle based way of
reproducing empirical observations,' say Loreto and co."
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #178 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:37

    

*And I don't doubt that's statistically true.  What they're saying
here is that second-guessing the world, with the model of the urn
and the balls, is a working model of the way that the real world
actually second-guesses itself.  

*If something new arrives, a True New Ball, it doesn't come starkly
alone, it comes with a bunch of Adjacent-Possible Balls.   Probably
the Adjacent Possible Balls exist without effort -- they're
spontaneously generated, inside people's heads.  

*My vision of the True New Ball must slightly but necessarily differ
from your True New Ball.  We all generate spaces of
Adjacent-Possibility just through everyday meme-mutation, from our
differences in sensibility.  Cultural innovations arrive in hosts
because a culture consists of a human horde.  

*Yes, that's tautology.  But at least the math works.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #179 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:41

    

*The deeper problem is that the world's not an Urn.  Also, the
"Balls" thing is, well, it's balls.  The universe isn't an urn full
of balls any more than the World is a bunch of threaded comments in
a WELL topic.  

*However, I don't mind that.  It's okay. I'm at peace with the
limitations. I can live with the limits of knowledge, and in fact I
kinda prefer 'em.  The map is not the territory, and no plan
survives contact with the enemy.  But if you knew the territory then
you wouldn't need the map.  Also it's never the plan that wins, it's
the act of planning.

*So every year I'm happy that I do this, and this year, it's been a
particular consolation for me. More than that, I feel energized now.
I feel creative, more so than I have in quite a while. I hope to do
things this year that will pleasantly surprise me.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #180 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 17 03:41

    
*See you next year.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #181 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 16 Jan 17 04:43

    
Bruce, thank you so much for your time and thoughtfulness. Wishing
you a most serendipitous and surprising year.

Jon, parting thoughts?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #182 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 16 Jan 17 04:46

    
For those of you following along this year's State of the World,
this is our last 'official' day of conversation. However, please
feel free to carry on here...this topic is always open and folks
within the WELL will respond as long as there is interest.

And, tomorrow, we start a new two week conversation with our own Ed
Ward, who's new book The History of Rock and Roll, Volume 1
(1920-1963) has just been published. Please join us.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #183 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 17 06:51

    
I'm guided by a practice of secular Buddhism, I.e. working with
Buddhism as a practice, not religion. To me it's clearly not
religion. The Buddha wasn't preaching a gospel, proselytizing some
vision of a supreme deity, or studying to pass the test at the Gates
of Heaven.  I'd say he was debugging his mind and mind-body,
believing we shouldn't be stressed or suffering so persistently,
that suffering has a cause, that the cause is findable, that it's
internal and not external, and that if you find the cause and
understand it, you can change your relationship with suffering. Part
of the way out is realizing that we try to see impermanent states
and objects as somehow permanent, and they just aren't. We crave for
permanence and cling to states and objects, though they inherently
change, and the changes are always "unsatisfactory" or "stressful"
or "suffering" as long as we cling. This includes clinging to the
idea that we as individual human beings are somehow permanent, and
that self is permanent. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #184 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 17 06:51

    
It's understandable that we to anchor ourselves to some sense of
permanence, that perception is rooted in how we must inevitably live
to survive in the world. The difficult practice is to acknowledge
impermanence, stop clinging to what we desire abhorring what we
don't desire, but at the same time live effectively in the world.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #185 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 17 06:52

    
I'm a bad Buddhist, not practicing with a sangha, not guided by a
master, so I should qualify the understanding I've presented here as
suspect. But I do know that a meditation practice that provides
insight into the impermanence of the self and the world feels right,
so I keep practicing.

And I thought about this while I was reading Bruce's last
passages... the balls keep coming and they keep changing, the world
is process, the pendulum swings - and the "I" who is writing this
today is not necessarily the "I" who will be sitting at this same
keyboard tomorrow, and is certainly not an "I" that will persist
infinitely in any direction. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #186 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 17 06:52

    
The wild swing from the solid stability of an Obama administration
to the chaotic instability of a Trump administration is a dramatic
change, but change is inevitable, and as Bruce suggests, the world
keeps spinning. Somewhere in the world there is profound suffering
and loss, elsewhere there is wonder and achievement.  We may see
large scale global catastrophes, nuclear disasters or wars,
supervolcanoes blasting the atmosphere, unlivable climate, planetary
death and destruction. But I recall that, when Pynchon published
Gravity's Rainbow, one of my fellow students in an honors class
called "The Question of Authority in Literature" referred to it as
"another shaggy apocalypse story." 

Shaggy apocalypse stories abound, from the bearded street-corner
"end is near" cartoon trope to the religious myths of an end-time.
Buddha would likely have chuckled at apocalyptic thinking and myth. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #187 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 17 06:53

    
But there's only one time, and it's now... refrigerator humming,
garbage cans banging, birds snacking birdseed in the backyard, and
Jon L. tapping keys on his Mac.

I think we would all benefit by spending more time right here, right
now... by getting to know ourselves, and the limitations and
multiplicities of our 'self,' and by spending a little less time
reading Facebook and Twitter posts, or real or fake news, or
apocalyptic wranglings... and more time sitting quietly, doing
nothing. counting our breaths.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #188 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 16 Jan 17 09:49

    
Marvelous boys!

Thank you both for an intriguing conversation...new perspectives for
us all.

And profound thanks to all who have participated...you have made us
all richer for your sharing.

This is definitely one for the books.

We may be 'archaic' but it still works :)
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #189 of 198: John Spears (banjojohn) Wed 18 Jan 17 08:51

    
I know it's too late, but I think 2017 actually merits a longer
discussion. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #190 of 198: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Thu 19 Jan 17 09:11

    

i'm sorry the official discussion is ending... Farai Chideya, all-around
goddess and former WELLpern, author, current NYU faculty, NPR commentator,
etc etc, just posted this and was into having me share it with y'all:

Here's five things I'm tracking as paradigm shifts that will likely
accelerate during the next four years. They didn't start today and these
are long long long haul issues.

1. global oligarchy -- the US is likely to become more like Russia and
China in the naked display of family dynastic power, with laws evolving to
serve those dynasties. Not new, just way more powerful.

2. Fossil fuels vs. renewable energy... the fossil fuel industry is going
to go all out on legal and political maneuvers as there are pressures from
big institutions like universities to divest from stocks; and fuel
interests go through cycles of over-production and metered scarcity. We
will have renewable energy tech way before we have the will to use it,
because of the pushback.

3. The battle for masculinity. Making appeals to the American
hypermasculine ideal is still great for short-term battles, like winning an
election, but that trope also leaves men feeling depleted by lack of
emotional intimacy and family time. I write about this a bit in The
Episodic Career. There's a countering movement for a new masculinity (I
would argue far more traditional to humans than what we now see as the
masculine role) that blends the provider/protector role and the nurturer
role, and is more fulfilling for men.

4. Jobs v. UBI/"the jobless future." -- Universal Basic Income has been
floated as a cure for declining labor force participation rates,
particularly among men. All people, but especially men, are made to feel
less-than when they cannot find work. A "check for everyone" UBI system can
solve basic needs but not the need to feel useful to society. Also, per the
issue of masculinity, a UBI system that works will need to come with a
social evolution recognizing the value of nurturing and caregiving, which
people without formal employment (male or female) will likely do more of.

5. The end of the fiction of American meritocracy. If you dig into the
research, America has never truly been a society of widespread social
mobility. Race, class, gender, national origin and membership (for example,
the "membership" you get by going to an elite university and benefitting
from those ties, as I have) have always been used to engineer who gets
what. This election was, in part, about people who had been relatively
privileged in American meritocracy seeing that privilege slip away. As we
battle over these many levels of meritocracy, we could be left with class
warfare in more than a metaphorical sense. Or we could turn into a truer
meritocracy. Like all equality struggles, it's a long-haul. And the future
is up to us.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #191 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 25 Jan 17 06:01

    
Thanks for posting that, <magdalen>! I saw it when Farai posted it
elsewhere. If readers want to know where to follow up with Farai,
her blog is at http://farai.com/ and her Twitter account is at
https://twitter.com/farai.  

Re #5, which resonated with me, having learned so late in life that
privilege is a blind spot, aggressively hidden behind our
assumptions about our "hero's journey" and ignorance/dismissal of
the harness and wire that makes the hero's flight possible. 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #192 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 25 Jan 17 06:38

    
This is only a subset of the larger problem, but it always surprises
me to see how many smart people believe wholeheartedly that being
smart = "merit."

Ah, so you choose to be born with a high IQ, eh?  Unlike all those
other people who made bad choices...
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #193 of 198: David Gans (tnf) Wed 25 Jan 17 11:21

    

On the other hand, being smart is a reasonable predictor of comprehension and
competence, isn't it?
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #194 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 25 Jan 17 11:38

    
In my experience, it's overrated on both counts.  It depends what
you're trying to comprehend and what you're trying to be competent
at.

I've often seen it act as a real barrier to comprehension.  Sort of
the "I'm so smart that I must be right" phenomenon.  

It gives you a more powerful toolset, but you've gotta figure out
what to do with it.

Very often people of average intelligence can easily see the flaws
in the brilliant plans of geniuses.  I think part of this is because
intelligence really is multi-dimensional, as the education prof
Howard Gardner likes to remind us.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #195 of 198: (fom) Wed 25 Jan 17 20:22

    
We need a Farai topic here.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #196 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 26 Jan 17 06:20

    
I agree, we should invite Farai to Inkwell for sure.

What smart people fail to realize, I think, is that they're not
necessarily smart about everything just because they're smart about
something. The assumption that there's a test that measures
"intelligence" and is across-the-board meaningful is questionable. 

I.e. it's smart to think critically about the IQ concept. (See
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligence_quotient#Criticism_and_views). 
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #197 of 198: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 26 Jan 17 08:45

    
I know at least some things that I'm good and bad at.  In 3-D
spatial stuff I'm probably not the equal of the average rodent. 
Oddly, I am a freakishly good judge of 2-D proportions and visual
information, which allowed me to earn a (bare) living for several
years as an architectural historian even though I'd had no formal
training.  I picked up the basic idea in days and became a real
expert very quickly.
  

inkwell.vue.495 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2017
permalink #198 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 27 Jan 17 07:33

    
The Hero's Journey:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hero's_journey

Off you go now :)
  

