inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #0 of 169: Master of Ceremonies (jonl) Mon 6 Jan 20 09:08

    
Welcome to State of the World 2020, 21st century fruitcake edition.
We hope to find the tasty maraschinos in the fruitcake sludge that
surrounds the beginning of this new decade.  Switching metaphors, we
are approaching the Thundering Twenties ... thunder, rain, and
lightning flashing - right through the middle of it, we'll go
dashing, ignoring the heavy weather, the psychic storms, the
confusion boats steering wild. (h/t Roger Miller)

As always, Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky lead the conversation,
reliable narrators working without spin, at a time we're told (by
the anti-consigliere) that truth isn't truth. We'll be joined by
musician/composer Holly Herndon and philosopher and digital artist
Mat Dryhurst. Also various members of the WELL (our host platform),
and others who follow the conversation and email comments or
questions from time to time. (Send emails to inkwell-hosts at
well.com). 

Bruce is a science fiction author, speaker, sometimes design critic,
and culture hacker known for his many books, writings, and talks.
Jon is co-editor of the Plutopia News Network, writer,  and digital
culture maven. 

If by following this conversation you find synapses firing, if it
makes you get up and move, especially if you feel like dancing, then
we've done our job. Gloomy as the future appears right now, our best
way forward is in the Zimbabwean proverb: "If you can walk, you can
dance, if you can talk, you can sing."

The WELL is a seminal online community that has been around and
active for 35 years.  You can be part of ongoing conversations like
this one by joining the WELL: https://www.well.com/join/  - which
you might want to do if you're tired of the drive-by posting formats
of Facebook and Twitter and would rather be part of a real
community.

Onward we go, through the virtual fog...
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #1 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:45

    
MMXX, Year of the Rat!

I'm grateful for our WELL State of the World tradition.  Just
imagine if we lacked the heritage of our commentary here, and we had
to start yelling about the state of our planet's affairs,
flat-footed, from a cold start.

Anybody can spontaneously rant, but a ranting tradition is a
different, nobler, more meaningful matter. It's like making a new
friend, versus cherishing the dwindling number of your old, loyal,
trusted, old ones.   With an established tradition, you know who you
are and where you stand -- even if you're in Ibiza.

Which is where I am now, just like in  WELL SOTW 02018 and 02019.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #2 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:45

    

Are there any major differences between my activities in Ibiza in
02018, and here in MMXX, the mystical dawn of a new decade?  Yeah,
sorta.  

I used to roam the streets of Ibiza as I normally roam streets of
any strange city, toting an efficient global-nomad shoulder-bag,
crammed with electronics and travel-survival knickknacks.  This year
I just carry a  floppy canvas grocery bag.

Admittedly, it's a tote-bag from the distant "Bangalore Literary
Festival," but nobody cares about branding.  If you carry groceries
around in a bag, nobody sees you.  Because obviously you must be
local.

  It's the foreigners and tourists who have those ergonomic,
airplane-centric, efficient bags. They don't slop around with cheap
canvas bags meant for onions.

     So what I'm sporting in Ibiza in MMXX is camouflage for our new
era of ethnonationalism and "overtourism," a term recently invented
in nearby Barcelona.  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #3 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:46

    

    Torino, where I hang out rather more often, is boasting about
their tourism this year.  Their tourist racket is doing great. 
Huge, posh culture shows, hotels packed to capacity.  They figured
out how to chisel tourists in their municipal subway system, the
restaurants shovel "Il Food" into the foreign gourmets, so they're
doing fine.   Turin is still haunted by the Crisis of 2008, so signs
of lively popularity are welcome to them.   

     Barcelona and Ibiza, by contrast,  struggle to keep the jetset
at bay.  They don't build Trump Walls against the tourists, or
confine them in Xinjiang camps, or cut their connectivity
Kashmir-style -- but at basis it's the same phenomenon, just with a
different victim-class.

    I'm never here in Ibiza during the big "season," where the
foreign crowds get intense and obnoxious.   I come to Ibiza to work
on fiction.  I write here without much distraction, because there's
nothing going on in Ibiza this time of year except for road, wharf
and hotel repair.  Even New Years is muted: the native Ibizans don't
party much, because they get paid to do that.

        That's why, in Ibiza in MMXX, I  resemble an Ibiza
construction worker who is out buying some cabbage.  I wear gray
nylon cargo pants and blue-striped Pablo Picasso sailor shirts.  My
shoes look a little weird, but most blue-collar people in Ibiza have
some vague former-hippie cast to them.  Grocery checkout girls have
tattooed fingers, guys mending fishing nets have yin-yang figurines,
suburban gardens have Buddha shrines, that's who they are.  I don't
mind that about them.  I get it. I sympathize.

 Sympathy makes me dress as a guy who would never stay in an AirBnB
or hire an Uber.  These Silicon Valley unicorns have become the
class enemies of Barcelona.  Uber-using AirBnB lurkers are
recognized as potential hostiles.  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #4 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:47

    

    Barcelona hates the twenty-teens digital vanguard just as much
as San Francisco does.  Any allure that globalized network-culture
once held is just  over; it's well past the "New Dark" and the
disbelieving malaise, and advanced into a subdued riot feeling.   

    Anything  that American technology tries to pull in Europe has
Trump's face stamped on it.  Everyone just assumes it's a lie, a
fraud, a subterfuge and a grift, and they're gonna get rooked, if
not murdered by drones.  So far, in response, they can riot or
strike -- in France, for over a year now -- but they can't
accomplish anything administratively, because the entire political
class and the oligarchs have all bought into it. 

    This is not exactly fascist oppression, but it's gone well
beyond mere discontent.  It's an advancing cultural sensibility,
like "New Dark 1.2," where everybody knows the lights have been
turned out, but nobody thinks they're gonna come back on, because
the guys at the fossil power plant want to make Darkness the
standard.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #5 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:48

    


    People like to focus their attention on The Donald, because the
actual media is in abject collapse, so there's nothing but demagogic
social media and the right-wing TV machine, and The Donald is great
at that.  However, this sensibility I'm describing is not merely
American or Trumpian,  it really is the State of the World.  Other
nations have more advanced versions of it than Americans do.

    There used to be certain planetary regions and polities that
were markedly different from the rest, but in MMXX, even though
everybody claims they're antiglobal, sovereign and patriotic,
everybody's very the-same.

   The BRICS for instance, Brazil Russia India China South Africa,
it used to be modish to think that they were an emerging
ex-Third-World bloc  with radically different values, but they
aren't.  Brazil is Trumpistan with a Trump who is less sleepy and
more predatory. 

     Russia is anti-global but pro-oligarch -- they're the only
nation-state that has tamed their rich people, because their spies
eat them.  
 
      India is doing its level best to become China, with a
Trumpistan strongman leader.  India is slavishly following the new
Xinjiang model of naming, numbering, surveilling and confining the
Muslims in vast regions of imposed Internet darkness.  They're also
sending out fascist squadrons of club-wielding Party operatives to
beat up college students.  India is polarizing fast, between the
majority-ethnic ultra-nationalists and everyone else who doesn't
want to get stepped on.  Not a particularly Indian situation.  It's
a state of the world situation with some Indian characteristics.

     South Africa is going sideways, it's just a mess and has no
solutions to offer anybody.

     Britain seems plausibly different because they've engaged in
the most extreme act of frantic self-harm, but they seem to simply
have the high-grade fever version of the some low-grade global
disease that everybody else also has.  I hope to get into some of
Boris Johnson's activities later, because BoJo interests me a lot;
he's a rare version of a political writer who is actually weirder,
and makes up weirder stuff, than most science fiction writers.  Hey,
they elected him.  Whatever noisome slurry that BoJo dishes out in
their Oliver Twist bowls, they were begging for it. 

     I used to closely follow Estonia and Dubai, because they were
small, fast-moving countries, deliberately futuristic and keenly
aware of their own outlier weirdness.  Here in MMXX, I needn't
bother.  Estonia has caught the ethnonational disease, so, instead
of lathering-on their sleek high-tech virtuality, they whine about
foreign immigrants and their precious Estonian-ness.  The autocrat
sheik of Dubai had a sex scandal, and his Vanguard of Happiness got
sour in a hurry when a defector concubine scampered out of the
harem.  It's bad.  It's  not "chop up dissidents with chainsaws"
bad, but it's not good.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #6 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:49

    

     It's strange that there's so much unanimity in this new
worldwide sensibility.  Russia and the USA have never been so much
alike as nations and peoples, ever.  When American Republicans say
they prefer Putin to Democrats, that sounds weird, but Democrats
would probably prefer Putin to Trump.

    China is sort of exotic and different, at least they claim they
have exotic and inscrutable "Chinese Characteristics," but they've
got the huge septic sore of Hong Kong, and all they can do about is
deceive themselves and lie to everybody else.  Xinjiang, the Chinese
high-tech AI solution to Muslim belt-bombs, is so direly unpleasant
that the Han majority, eager merchants who should be flooding out
along the New Silk Road to conquer the planet's Eurasian commerce,
are packing up and leaving Xinjiang.  The normal people are too
disgusted to sell anything.  They can't stand the everyday ugliness.


    In response to these self-made disorders, Xi Jianping, who is an
engineer and used to have some grasp of measurable reality, decides
to re-write both the Koran and the Bible, so as to align these
foreign texts with state-approved Xi Jianping Thought.   Okay, I'm a
novelist with  vague postmodern tendencies, so I wouldn't mind
rewriting the Bible myself.   But really -- you could ask Sun Tzu --
what is the end-game of a politician attacking ancient scripture? 
Could there be any political gesture more blatantly phony,
egomaniacal, self-parodic?  Even Trump doesn't re-write the damn
Bible, he just co-opts all the televangelists.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #7 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:50

    


Also, while all this deceit, mummery, hucksterism and hubristic
fooforaw goes on, mainstream cultural assumptions are quietly
disappearing.  Mainstream consumer capitalism is dying, fast and
silent and for good, like its shopping malls.  There aren't any
"consumers," there are just oligarchs and the rabble.

 There's not a lot that's brand-new in MMXX, but under cover of the
smog, old institutions and assumptions are  disappearing. You can't
just say, "let's go back and do it the old way," because there is
nothing left to be old-fashioned with.  The conservatives  have
destroyed everything they wanted to conserve.  The liberals have
nothing much to be liberal with or about, except gay sex and
marijuana.

   The Republican Party used to be keen on the cultural bedrock of
family values, balancing the budget, nitpicking the Constitution,
global imperialism, military valor, arming the populace...
right-wing, but American right-wing.  In MMXX the Republicans are a 
basic ethnonational party; they're quite like Russians, Hungarians
or Serbs,  hicks who will put up with anything as long as it coddles
their identity issues.  

    Of course they lie about that, but since they're lying about
religion and race, which everybody always lies about, they figure
they've got a mighty fortress there.  It's not all that mighty.  The
Confederacy lost.  Even the Nazis and the Soviets lost.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #8 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:52

    

    It's just not the Republican apparatchiks who have abandoned all
previous moral convictions for a mess of pottage -- all the US
population is like that.  The Americans used to be self-assured,
mobile, visionary, inventive; now they're hunkered-down, dogmatic,
disinterested in any consensus; they're 100% American-Dream-Free.  

    The American life expectancy is in decline: they can't keep
death at bay.  The American health care system is so astonishingly
bad that black Americans escaped being murdered with opioids,
because the racist American sickness-industry refused to prescribe
them any of the pills.  This is the domestic narcotic biz version of
voter suppression.  That is an unhealthy polity.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #9 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:52

    

     The Russians, by contrast, have learned to drink less vodka. 
Their birthrate has even popped up a little.  Physically, they're
improving, and I'm glad at that news  Yes, the Russians are
diligently waging all kinds of asymmetrical warfare, they have built
their own domestic Splinternet to subvert, repel and destroy the
Internet,  and they will pitch any dreadful thing over their
firewall from nerve-gas to barrel-bombs, but I feel happier about
them.   They scared me, because I thought  they would die en masse
of sheer disillusionment,  hapless spite,  weltschmerz and morbid
despair.

    Probably the Russians will manage.  They're a great nation which
is not suicidal.  Their fearless leader will dump the wife of the
children for a sexy gymnast, but they aren't kamikazes, and they
don't need belt-bombs. The Russians in MMXX are Putin-Czarist hick
fundies whose ultra-illusory worldview make literally no sense,  and
deliberately so, but at least they're not dead on their feet.  Even
a dopey GRU assassin from the backwoods of Siberia is less scary
than a hollow-eyed zombie.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #10 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:53

    

     So in MMXX, we're in a world situation that claims to be
post-global and post-Internet and post world-trade, where everybody
wants to take back control, be great again, assure sovereign
cyberspace, set tariffs, jail immigrant tots, beat up ethnic
minorities, nurture billionaires, ignore science, and reduce
education to assure that there are fewer brainy chicks -- but in
practice, there's no big difference among the players.  They ALL do
that.  There's next to no genuine cultural variety.  They all use
the same hardware, slogans and techniques.

      Also, there's no technological innovation in MMXX. Innovation
and invention are out of style.  The closest we've got to innovation
is "capital moating," where you start some allegedly technical
company to screw around with, say, hotels or taxis, and throw so
many billions at the project that businessmen are awed.  That's
financially innovative -- sort of -- it's like the space-aviation
biz staying aloft by angling subsidies.  That's not Moore's Law,
there's nothing amazingly great that is busting out of the garage to
set Google-Apple-Facebook-Amazon-Microsoft on their ear.  There is
no wonderment, because there is no reason to wonder.

    The  fix is in. The Industry has consolidated.  Best of the year
lists from tech journalists have been replaced by lists of the worst
things happening in tech.   For the first time in my life, it's
getting hard to find any genuine technical novelty. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #11 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 20 01:53

    

     Unless, that is, you play Holly Herndon records -- not that
Holly makes "records" out of fossil-fueled vinyl, for that would be
antique.  However, I stream a lot of mp3s off the laptop into the
Ibiza stereo here, and whenever I play Holly Herndon, that's when my
wife stops whatever she's doing and demands "What is that?  Where
did that come from?"

    In her most recent effort, "Proto," it came from Dr Herndon's
deep-learner Artificial Intelligence that was trained to sing in
chorus with human beings, and that is some chorus.  We anticipate
that Dr Herndon and her Significant Technical Associate, Matt
Dryhurst, will join our chorus here in the State of the World.  They
may be on tour, or DJing, but whatever happens to musicians will
happen to everybody.   
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #12 of 169: Lena via lendie (lendie) Tue 7 Jan 20 06:14

    
What can one say after that bit of cheer but Happy New Year and
Happy New Decade!
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #13 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 06:45

    
We're into overtourism ourselves, lately. Not the royal we, but my
longtime spouse/partner Marsha and I. She's plugged into an array of
travel networks, and planning trips has become her full-time
preoccupation. Even as we travel, she's planning the next few trips.


We spent some time in Miami Beach recently, a shiny place with
creative spunk, great food, wild clothes, a graffiti aesthetic, hot
cars buzzing the streets. All I could think was how it would all be
under water in a decade. It felt haunted, in a way. When you live
there, do you think about this inevitable future disaster? A few
years ago we visited the Washington coast, destined someday to be
wiped out by a tidal wave when the Cascadia subduction zone slips.
We discussed the potential disaster with a woman working in a
restaurant, and I mentioned evac signs and safety plans. She said
there's no way we can escape when it hits. The safety plan is mostly
to help children sleep at night, apparently. A park ranger told us
she'd been living with the possibility all her life, yet she
remains. She'd shaved her head, as if for frictionless escape.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #14 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 06:46

    
Human extinction seems inevitable, at least on one level, but on
another level we just keep living, moving, working, making,
ruminating, traveling, entertaining, eating, sleeping, dumping  - we
don't think about the inevitability of extinction any more than we
think of our very specific, inevitable individual demise, in my case
not many years away.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #15 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 06:47

    
On New Years' Eve MMXX we made the short trip downtown, where we
stayed the night.  We were downtown for the big Esther's Follies
NYEve show, missing the fireworks, perhaps making some of our own.
We toasted the transition with the reliably energetic, wildly funny
Esther's troupe, including magician Ray Anderson, whose talent was
to disappear grimness and woe. If only he could extend his magic....
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #16 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 06:47

    
Walking to the hotel, we saw diverse revelers crowding the streets,
lined up for pizza and beer, waving transparent balloons, dancing,
spinning, drunk with the moment.  Outside the hotel, we saw a young
girl in a deep blue party dress and wobbly heels, unable to stand,
sitting in a puddle of ... some liquid, I won't assume. Thinking to
myself, I hope that's not an omen.  In the elevator, we ride with a
twenty-something man wearing a bow tie and a blank drunken stare.
Friendly, but barely able to string a sentence. Through the glass
elevator as we ride up, we see sequined dresses and tuxedoes.  For
them, is it a night to remember, or a hope to forget?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #17 of 169: Bruce Umbaugh (bumbaugh) Tue 7 Jan 20 09:44

    
Whatever happens to musicians ....

So, yeah. What's happening to musicians next that we can expect to
come for the rest of us? What does streaming look like, for
instance, in other lines of work?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #18 of 169: Alan Fletcher (af) Tue 7 Jan 20 11:11

    
Is it just me .. or is that the most depressing State of the World
introduction we've ever had?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #19 of 169: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 12:07

    
Short link for the public view of this conversation is
http://bit.ly/sotw-2020 - please feel free to share far and wide.
Suggested hashtag: #sotw-2020

If you're not a member of the WELL, and you want to make a comment
or ask a question, you have two options:
1) Join the WELL and add directly to the conversation, or
2) Send your comment or question via email to inkwell-hosts at
well.com.

If you want to join the WELL, here's the link:
https://www.well.com/join/
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #20 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 20 12:08

    
<af> It's not just you!
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #21 of 169: Lena via lendie (lendie) Tue 7 Jan 20 12:35

    
See #12
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #22 of 169: Alan Fletcher (af) Tue 7 Jan 20 12:47

    
Ah ... but <12> still implies some optimism for the year and decade.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #23 of 169: Matthew McClure (mmc) Tue 7 Jan 20 13:02

    
Looking for green shoots in a bleak landscape.

There may not be much consumer innovation, but battery technology
seems to be screaming along - lithium-sulphur, Ryden dual carbon,
etc.: http://bit.ly/2s4LE9N has a breezy non-technical overview.

And Mark Z. Jacobson at Stanford offers some hope with his analysis
that we could provide 100% of energy requirements without fossil
fuels.

And Chris Anderson and TED and doing Countdown,
https://countdown.ted.com/, so the word may spread a little.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #24 of 169: Matthew McClure (mmc) Tue 7 Jan 20 13:03

    
Oops. "and doing Countdown" would read more sensibly if I'd typed
"are doing Countdown".
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #25 of 169: redraw Gantt charts in his head (nanlev) Tue 7 Jan 20 14:06

    
Mark Jacobson's analysis is problematic, and overlooks some
real-world issues with renewables, but it's good to see someone
pushing that envelope to its farthest reaches. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #26 of 169: ixak (ixak23) Tue 7 Jan 20 14:09

    
"This is not exactly fascist oppression, but it's gone well beyond
mere discontent.  It's an advancing cultural sensibility, like "New
Dark 1.2," where everybody knows the lights have been turned out,
but nobody thinks they're gonna come back on, because the guys at
the fossil power plant want to make Darkness the standard."

To paraphrase a colleague of yours, Bruce, the "New Dark" is already
here, it's just not  equally distributed. I started my year in the
Philippines and ended it in Chad, with stops in Uganda, Palestine,
and Baltimore in-between. There is a fatalistic thread that I
continue to encounter around the world - the assumption in most of
the developing world is that the game is rigged to favor an elite
minority, and much of the white middle class seems to be figuring
that out only just now.

The malaise is real, and the appeal of fascism (and other
governments that rely on tribal/ethnic patronage for popular
support) is it's promise that the lights will at least stay on for
people like US. It seems to me that the path to countering this is
to do our best to turn the lights on for everyone.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #27 of 169: Kevin Welch (kwelch) Tue 7 Jan 20 21:14

    
My global travels this year took me to France, where in my
admittedly broken French I was unable to find a single fan of
Macron, which is probably not surprising given said year of riots.
It seems in our New Dark 1.2 each country has a choice between a
neo-liberal overlord who will take your money and give it to their
friends and a ethno-nationalist proto-fascist who will take your
money and give it to their friends, with the only difference between
the two being whom they're blaming for the grift instead of
themselves. It's like a pan-nationalist version of the two-party
system. Warren Ellis anticipated this phenomenon in
Transmetropolitan when he talked about politicians being either The
Smiler or The Beast.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #28 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 00:38

    

In the last State of the World I made a passing mention of Bill
Gates, so I thought I might briefly return for a glance at the
Gates-ometer.  

Bill informs his social media followers that he's gotten very
interested in getting enough healthy sleep, and that he's deeply
engaged in reading good novels.  There's also a few of Bill's
customary hobbyhorse remarks about nuclear power plants and averting
senile decline.

 I can't blame Bill for sleeping through this one.  If I didn't have
the WELL State of the World to awake me from my dogmatic slumbers,
I'd be sleeping more myself, and, hey, I sleep like a top.  Also,
I've got a stack of unread novels on the shelf, plus one I need to
compose.  

Bill, though has become "Good Billionaire" in an era of Oligarchy. 
Life was more interesting to Bill when he was unique among
billionaires.  Now he's on the back foot, it's like he's stuck in a
traffic jam of yachts.

Bill Gates doesn't seem depressed or particularly anxious about
current affairs.  It's also good that he's not being all
phony-upbeat or engaging in the cherry-picking game of
"things-are-awful-but."  Basically, Bill seems to be reserving his
energies and trying to avoid dementia until he finds an era more
hospitable to his vision of rationalist techno-philanthropy.  Maybe
in an Andrew Yang Administration -- but I dunno if he will ever
again participate in public life in the dynamic way he once did. 
This is the first year when Bill strikes me as an old-fashioned
figure,  a Boomer outwitted by events, trending toward fuddy-duddy.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #29 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 01:22

    
I’ve spent time in nations dominated by oligarchy.  Oligarchy feels
strange and different to Americans, but it’s by no means a new
condition in the world.  The condition of social affairs there is
not “depressing.”  It’s “humiliating.” 

It’s about humiliation, not sadness.  Huge class differentiation and
vast wealth disparity is about humbling people.  People have to be
taught there’s a lot they just can’t do that their betters can do,
and they’re better off not asserting themselves or making trouble
above their station, unless they’ve pledged fealty to some nobleman
who commands resources.  You can see the world fumbling itself
toward this kind of social situation, in events like US Senators
humbly sheltering themselves in Trump’s buildings, and talentless
Trump children as de facto cabinet members.

Americans are humiliated.  That’s why they’re keen on personal-power
fetish symbols like handguns. They cling to the Jeffersonian-yeoman
seilf-image, but that’s not the world they’re in.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #30 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 01:24

    

The world in MMXX is not in Crisis like it was in 2008, because it’s
become Oligarchic.  It’s a nascent oligarchy that is global in
scope, but is unsure of itself and hasn’t written any rules. It
lacks the palace etiquette of functional aristocracies.  They’re
like the rude-and-crude Oligarchs in the post-Soviet Transition, and
who went to the same sauna bath-houses and knew the same call-girls,
but lacked a rule-of-law to protect them from murdering one another.


But they did have Putin, who got it about them and their issues,
could out-murder anybody else because he was wrapped in the national
flag.  The siloviki clique of the Petersburg FSB set up a stable
spy-based deep-state, which is now becoming Russian Sovereign
Cyberspace.  It’s not “rule of law,” but it is a stable surveillance
state and a stable media-control state.  Managed democracy.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #31 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 01:25

    

Also, Russians don’t mind it that much.  They’re upset if they’re
intelligentsia or ideaiistic, but if you’re Ivan Sixpack, daily life
seems doable, if not exactly truthful or  reasonable.   Moscow looks
clean and shiny, your country is grabbing chunks of Ukraine in the
teeth of the former international order and getting away with it,
while Trump does whatever Putin says, mostly… So there are  valid
reasons for patriotic national enthusiasm, because the world is
coming to look like you — much more than you have to conform to the
world.  

So, yes, Putin is an oligarch spy autocrat and secret
multi-billionaire, but compared to cheap upstarts like Erdogan,
Muhammed bin Sultan, Trump, Boris Johnson, Viktor Orban in Hungary,
Modi in India, Putin is visibly a seasoned statesman.  He’s, by
comparison, a classy, on-top-of-it guy.   He poisons traitors, sure,
but he’s KGB, so they’re suppose to do that.  If you’re Russian,
it’s actually fun to watch Putin joke about murder in public.  Also,
if you’re Russian and you imagine yourself being Putin, and
wondering, well, what would I do in his place — yeah.  They’d do
what he does.  They’d have to get a little narrow-eyed and cold at
heart, but hey, James Bond. Enough said.

Even the Central Asian gymnast mistress doesn’t bother them.  Why
that chick isn’t world-famous, I’ll never know.  She’s like an
Ivanka Trump who can twist herself into a pretzel. A more fantastic
court-mistress even than Carla Bruni-Sarkozy, and that’s saying
something.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #32 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 01:26

    


So in MMXX I don’t think Russians are “depressed.”  If so, less
depressed than normal for them.  They may be getting a little
spooked about Siberia being on fire and  those springlike winters in
Moscow, but since a lot of that is their fault, they’re especially
motivated to lie about it.  After all, they don’t burn all that much
carbon themselves, they just sell it to other people who burn it.   

The world is remaking itself in their image, and after decades of
abject moral, political, economic and military defeat they are a
vanguard state in 02020.  If you know a lot about them, you can
kinda outguess how things are likely to go in this decade -- or, at
least, the beginning of it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #33 of 169: Administrivia - !Important! (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 05:44

    
We provided the WRONG EMAIL for sending comments and questions! 

The correct email is

      (((( inkwell at well.com ))))

Shorter, easier to type, and it works!

Apologies to all who got bounce messages...
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #34 of 169: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 05:45

    
Via email from Brian Slesinksy:

I'm wondering if anyone wants to comment on the state of the Maker
community? We might have had the last bay area Maker Faire last
year, though I stopped going a while ago since it seemed like I was
seeing the same stuff. The shelves at Fry's are bare, even here in
Silicon Valley. But online, everything seems fine? There are useful
vendors, you can order lots of interesting parts, and there are
plenty of hacks on Hackaday, and lots of educational material.

I just got into musical electronics last year and I'm personally
having lots of fun. But it feels a bit like woodworking, kind of an
eccentric hobby that some people are into but hardly world-changing.

Attempting to make just one thing myself also got me reflecting on
our utter dependence on the global supply chain. You can unplug from
social networks, sure, but where are you going to buy your stuff? If
you make it yourself, where do you buy parts and tools? Not to
mention outsourced services like laser cutting and PCB board
manufacture. It's hardly "buy nothing" day; I'm ordering more stuff
than ever.

People are down on world trade but I don't think anyone's really
contemplated what it would be like to try to go it alone. A large
nation with lots of manufacturing capability could maybe do it, if
they're willing to do without on some things. Maybe China would
manage it assuming Trump has convinced them to seriously try?
(Probably not.)

The nationalistic mood doesn't seem much in touch with globalist
reality?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #35 of 169: Giorgos Georgiadis (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 05:52

    
Via email from Giorgos Georgiadis:

I, for one, enjoyed the introduction. Depressing? Most definitely,
but I can do "depressing": twenty teens showed me how. But it also
offers clarity, and that's both a high-quality drug and a solid base
for discussion.

What about institutions? Should we try to prop them up, like
fortifications to help us weather the "political climate" change? Or
should we let them crumble and build new ones in the midst of chaos?

(I left the term deliberately undefined. Could be
benevolent-looking, like Temples of Knowledge AKA libraries,
universities and the like, or
oligarchy-targeted-by-oligarchy-for-subversion like parliamentary
democracy, or anything in between or sideways.) 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #36 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 06:48

    
"News" isn't what it used to be. 

The daily newspaper and end of day news broadcast were the limited
and often ignored sources of news in my youth. Most people had no
idea what was happening in the world. They were engaged in work or
in various ludic endeavors - living their lives without much thought
of the rest of the world. At the end of the day my father sprawled
on the couch supposedly reading the Wall Street Journal, but he
didn't read much before snoozing. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #37 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 06:49

    
Mass media evolved and brought more of the world into our homes -
the fifteen minute news recap at the end of the day extended to
thirty minutes. We would glance at the newspapers and background the
news broadcasts. We didn't think enough about the news to questions
whether it was effectively vetted, whether it was biased, whether it
was "fake."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #38 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 06:49

    
Flash forward to my reality du jour in MMXX: flooded with
personalized news feeds, not so much biased as tailored to my
biases, as interpreted algorithmically by newsbots operated
variously by Apple, Google, Facebook, et al.  24/7 news via the
Internet and via cable news left (MSNBC), right (Fox), and center
(arguably CNN, though if you're far enough right of center, CNN is
on your left).

News is delivered in crazy-quilt stacks via Apple News or Google
News - aggregators that deliver constantly-updated news feeds. And
it's weird: the news stacks include in close proximity hard news of
politics and disaster, op-eds tailored to the bot's interpretation
of my opinion states, glamfest reports (e.g. the recent Golden
Globes - what were they wearing?), crime reports, reporting on the
latest Saturday Night Live (now apparently newsworthy), latest 
thinking about health and nutrition - subject to change from one
study to another, food recipes,  news of climate emergency and
environmental collapse, advice for entrepreneurs, business
calculations, sports reports, market reports, superhero updates,
streaming schedules, more politics, more and more politics... 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #39 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 06:49

    
It appears that many have cable news running nonstop in their homes,
at least while they're awake, possibly while they're sleeping. The
cable channels news channels aren't delivering news as we usually
think of it, diverse reports of global happenings as you might hear
from still-reliable NPR.  The present an endless stream of political
updates and opinions, usually delivered by a moderator with 4-5
pundits on call to provide echoes of opinions. While cable
journalists may aspire to deliver real political news, in prime time
the shows tend to be more opinion than news. Arguable propaganda -
washing the brains of millions of people whose opinions are also
reinforced by tailored news feeds and social media memes.  In the US
and probably elsewhere, populations are politicized like never
before. 

It's a mess. Solutions are hard to come by.  Some of us who have
been involved with the Internet throughout its evolution saw the
potential danger in manipulation of the information ecosystem by
unscrupulous actors, and we often advocated teaching digital
literacy and critical thinking as an antidote to widespread
misinformation and disinformation campaigns. So far as I know,
that's never happened. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #40 of 169: Kevin Welch (kwelch) Wed 8 Jan 20 07:06

    
I think an endless drumbeat of credulous skepticism as the only
recipe to prevent getting fleeced in this world is behind a lot of
people's inability to discern information from disinformation.
Intellectually milquetoast poobahs have spent the better part of a
century telling people via non-sequitur allusions to such works as
1984, Brave New World, Fahrenheit 451, hell, even The Illuminatus
Trilogy, that everything they're told from any source of authority
is a lie, regardless of the actual evidence. It's the same credulous
skepticism promoting such a bizarre internet phenomenon as Flat
Earth. People in power say the Earth is round, and they never tell
the truth, so it must be flat.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #41 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 20 07:47

    
A "Message of Joy," posted 24 hours ago by Max Casacci, the lead
guitarist of Turin's best-known rock band "Subsonica."  Things seem
to be pretty lively in Max's digital recording studio, which has
walls paved with screens the size of movie posters.

https://soundcloud.com/maxcasacci/messaggio-di-gioia
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #42 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 08:34

    
> everything they're told from any source of authority
> is a lie, regardless of the actual evidence

Tim Leary famously encouraged his followers, and anyone else who
would listen, to "question authority." 
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Question_authority) 

The counterculture of the sixties and seventies was skeptical of
traditional authority, but accepted "alternative facts" and
theories, including conspiracy theories.  This thinking preceded and
fed into the alt-right/alt-light movements and the current supposed
"post-truth" political landscape. 

At this point, who can you believe? Best to be skeptical of
everything and have a well-tuned critical faculty. It's unfortunate
that grifters have seized political power and popular attention, via
methods for undermining institutional trust. But undermining that
trust started a long time ago, it's just drifted from healthy to
unhealthy skepticism. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #43 of 169: Angie Coiro (coiro) Wed 8 Jan 20 09:07

    
Good questions from Brian Slesinksy. The makers' credos ("If you
can't open it, you don't own it" is one example) posit them in
defiance to throwaway culture and the massive machines that
encourage and enable it. 

It's overboard to say that to be a maker today is a revolutionary
act, but there's at least a drop of truth there.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #44 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 20 10:03

    
I agree that makers can be part of a revolution, along with co-ops.
Make me think of voluntary simplicity, which never quite became a
movement:
http://simplicitycollective.com/start-here/what-is-voluntary-simplicity-2  We need that kind of thinking now, more than ever.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #45 of 169: Richard Lawler (richardl) Wed 8 Jan 20 19:16

    
I'm involved with the local maker movement in Sebastopol, the former
home of the former Make Magazine and former Maker Faire. It doesn't
feel revolutionary. We help people fix their things (lamps usually).
We teach people how to use some new tech (laser cutters, CAD, CNC
and microcontrollers) and old tech (jewelry making, welding and
woodworking). If feels a lot like what local government used to
provide as community enrichment at libraries and recreation centers
before Prop 13. And big tech no longer wants anything to do with
Maker. The code camp movement better watch their back. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #46 of 169: Gary Gach (ggg) Wed 8 Jan 20 19:49

    
Are those who hastily rebrand these days "The Roaring Twenties"
ill-advised? ( Remember how the original ended. ) How long does it
take to brand a decade when one's in it?

Meanwhile, what shall we call the decade past? 

Or are decades an entrenched formality superceded by digital time? 
I remember the seismic shock in the business cycle when early Java
issued an upgrade twice within the same quarter.  How long before
the Singularity?  etc.   

This year, I’ve observed the slow insinuation of AI into writing.
Whole articles are now being written and published by program.
(Probably ads too. Maybe also tv-series? ) And it's not just
reading. Handling my correspondence for me, Google Mail offers me a
small but nuanced thesaurus of choices with which to respond,
automatically.

I can personally attest to the benefits of voluntary simplicity,
Jon, to the degree I’ve embraced this in my own life. (I prepare my
own meals. Driven a car for but three months in my adult life, San
Francisco being walkable, and with great public transportation. No
tv. See no need for a cell phone.  Is vegetarianism part of that
too? ) And I know I’m not the only one. We recognize & respect each
other.   

Co-ops, in my book, are great, 'tho I've yet to be engaged in any,
so can't speak personally. Meanwhile, I subscribe to Platform.Coop,
which I find a great bunch of futurists. Here's their year in review

 https://platform.coop/blog/the-year-in-platform-cooperatives/

And, along with your ever-buoyant, refreshing, eclectic, vital and
needful annual notes in general, Bruce – thanks a bushel & a heap
for the amazing music links. ( Do you maintain an online playlist,
or channel to subscribe to? Or is that now a retro concept. )  Here
are two note-bending, mind-opening renditions of a Gnossienne by
Satie that might lend new meaning in our times to what was known
"world music."  They nourish my aspiration to live in a world that,
instead of being more and more a monoculture ( Satie as Muzak ), is
as open to imagination and creative possibility as the clear blue
sky is wide – bringing us closer together in our diversity – 

Van-Anh Vo
 https://youtu.be/nyUk4O5hrc4 [ 2011 ]
& an even more simple rendition https://youtu.be/-WgLCn6VN-8 [ 2012
]
( would you call the camera position more of a close up ?
I believe the Russian call that "bigger" rather than closer. )

&

Arturo O'Farrill & The Afro Latin Jazz Orchestra
https://youtu.be/QwzdYaP2x7k  [ 2013 ] 

( Maybe your wife will ask, "What's that!"? ) 

They're not from the past year – but the past decade – which, again,
I'm still just starting to try to wrap my midget head around.  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #47 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:08

    

    So, on the subject of geopolitics of the 2020s, how do you
figure out how things are likely to work during this decade?

    Well, military theorists have been talking about "plutocratic
insurgency" since 2011, but once you're reached today's condition of
oligarchy, it's no longer an "insurgency," it's a genuine political
arrangement which has to create new social norms after buying or
hollowing out all the old ones.

    So the most interesting new institutional innovation is what the
Russians call the "curator" figure.  The world's foremost "curator"
is the guy known as "Putin's Cook," Yevgeny Prigozhin.  The 2020s
are pretty much at the feet of this guy.  He's doing great.

     Prigozhin is a former Saint Peterburg gangster who swore fealty
to Putin, early on -- he ran Putin's favorite restaurant and owned a
Petersburg grocery chain.   Now Prigozhin supplies a lot of Russian
army chow and has become a   state-supported mogul.

     Also Prigozhin deputized to run all kinds of wildly damaging
offshore operations.  He's got a private mercenary army called
"Wagner" which has been very busy in Ukraine, Syria and Libya, as
well as a cyberwar outfit called "Internet Research Agency" which
employs hundreds of trolls to disrupt elections.  Along with other
holdings.

      Of course Prigozhin takes his orders directly from Putin, but
he's never been in the Russian government and never will be. 
There's no reason for Prigozhin to be in Putin's government, because
the government is a stumbling block for oligarchic dominance.  A
"curator" doesn't belong to the state, he is private and belongs to
an oligarchy, and he's informally licensed to use huge sums of
billionaire money to raise as much hell as possible, anywhere
outside the nation-state's formal boundaries. 
 
     Also, if he's caught performing this global piracy by some
other government, the government simply denies that they have
anything to do with him, and tells them to go pound sand.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #48 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:08

    

     The Iranian general who just got blown up, Qassim Soleimani, is
pretty much a picture-perfect "curator," except the Iranians put a
uniform on him.  Other than that, he did everything Prigozhin did,
in the same way, and even on the same battlefields with the same oil
derricks.

      Eric Prince of Blackwater aka Akademi, the brother of Trump
Education Secretary Betsy Devos, is a "curator."  When Trump was
trying to shake down the TV comedian who currently runs Ukraine,
Giuliani had the "curator" offshored henchman role.

     Oligarchs lack other good ways to get stuff done, because the
normal mechanisms of governance belong to what they dismiss as the
"deep state."  They are old-fashioned and too much trouble, which is
why Trump can rub-out General Soleimani even though the USA at the
moment has no Director of National Intelligence,  no Homeland
Security Secretary, no head of Customs and Border Protection , no
head of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, no State Department
Under Secretary of Arms Control, and no Navy Secretary.  These
officials were all in the way, and even though they were  linchpins
of American global military-industrial supremacy, they're also,
just, clutter in the 2020s.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #49 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:09

    

     The World Trade Organization is about to collapse because Trump
won't appoint anybody to serve in it.  Trump prefers Oligarch
trade-wars where the children of Chinese tech dynasties are
kidnapped. In Oligarchy, you don't want tiresome negotiation through
global bureaucracies: you want other billionaires to kiss the ring
and bow the knee.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #50 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:09

    
     "Curators" do a lot of the work that covert intelligence
services used to do, but they're not covert, they're just
privatized.  It's become difficult to hide spies in the 2020s,
because there is so much casual, yet ubiquitous surveillance going
on.  Everybody knows the names, ranks and faces of the spy-soldiers
that Putin sent to poison people in London.  The USA's covert
operations have been devastated, mostly by Chinese cyberwarriors who
mopped up all the federal recruitment records.  So it's very hard to
remain actually secret.  Instead, you have to use privatized
cut-outs, and also, you just have to deny. You can get impeached for
massive legal misbehavior; but then you just shrug and say, fine, so
what?  Stonewall it.  Lie about everything all the time. Guerrillas
in the mist.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #51 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:10

    
     "Curators" are illegal and even war-criminals, but if nobody
can enforce the former laws, it becomes a realm of Machiavellian
maneuver among the super-rich.  If you're a veteran of the New York
real estate biz, the law is a series of suggestions.  New York real
estate has been around a long time.  It's older than the USA.

       So modern "curators" are more like privateering warlords than
spies or political operatives, but a basic geopolitical problem
arises when they try to legitimize their activities and hold on to
whatever they stole.  Nobody has set up any system to allow that
yet, and privatized global marauding goes against the Westphalian
Order.  Even if you conquer Ukraine, you can't get named "Lord
Conqueror Duke of Ukraine."  Embarrassingly, you have to fake it
indefinitely.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #52 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:10

    

      At the moment there's a big to-do in Libya as rival warlords
are backed by the Turks and the Russians.  In theory, this ought to
lead to de-facto offshore Ottoman and Czarist colonies in Africa, a
source of oil and cheap labor, or whatever they imagine they are
getting there.
The Libyans are so screwed-up by their Curse of Oil that they'd
probably be better off as colonial slaves of the rapacious Turks and
cruel Russians; at least they could get to the grocery store without
being shot by snipers, and they could probably get some potatoes.

     However, even though Libya's getting sectioned off and
colonized by curators -- apparently -- the UN, NATO, the usual
power-payers, China even, they all say nothing about it.   Putin and
Erdogan confer privately about it, while everybody else looks in the
other direction.  Nobody else wants to risk conquering and pacifying
Libya.  They all figure, probably correctly, that it's a quagmire.  

   So in MMXX, poor Libya is supposed to get pacified through the
actions of curator warlords, packs of hired mercenaries, and fleets
of killer drones.  Okay: assuming that somehow works, what will
Libya use for postage stamps?  What kind of money will they have? 
What passports? Will Amazon do deliveries?   Are they stateless
Somalia with better-equipped white-guy marauders? What gives with
that?  It's so interesting.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #53 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 20 01:11

    

    Also, "curators" don't have to be huge; they can be a fast,
dinky two-man operation.  Carlos Ghosn, who is just a mere common
automobile millionaire, hired an ex Green-Beret and a Lebanese
militiaman to escape the Japanese rule of law and smuggle him off to
Lebanon.  And that worked -- he got smuggled away in a pirate chest,
yo-ho-ho.  

     Millionaires didn't used to do brazen stuff like that, because
they were afraid of the international order.  No big reason to fret
about that now.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #54 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 20 11:41

    
In this new reality of "all power to the billionaire oligarchs,"
Donald Trump's ascendance seems to fit, but he's got a problem.

You can see that he's a wild bull, because he's so intimate with
bullshit, but his supporters LIKE having a wild bull tearing through
the house. The didn't like the decor, they wanted an excuse to
redecorate. Tear it apart, and we'll rebuild it.

But what happens when he's wrecked the refrigerator, uprooted the
plumbing, torn through the walls, broken all the windows? He's
taking out the decor you didn't like, but he's tearing through
everything else. He's destroying the stuff you still want and need.
You can look the other way, but sooner or later the food's spoiling
and the rain's getting in. 

To hold power, a boss bull like Trump has to do one thing: he has to
make his people feel safe.  The problem with this wild bull is that
he's goring everone and everything in sight.  He demands loyalty but
he's never loyal. 

Sooner or later, he's gonna be Lonesome Rhodes. It just seems
inevitable. The best teflon coating wears away, sooner or later. 
(See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Face_in_the_Crowd_(film) if you
don't get that reference.)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #55 of 169: Angie Coiro (coiro) Thu 9 Jan 20 11:56

    
Lonesome Rhodes needed that one person willing to turn the
microphone up. I don't know if anyone around Trump is willing to be
that person.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #56 of 169: Kevin Welch (kwelch) Thu 9 Jan 20 12:05

    
The microphone has been turned up plenty of times around Trump, see
the infamous Access Hollywood tape. The problem is it's never been
turned up on anything that was a deal-breaker for his base.
Although, I've grown so cynical and morbidly impressed with his
base's ability to resolve their cognitive dissonance around the man
that I truly think Trump could get hot-mic'ed saying that he's
secretly handing America over to communist antifa Muslim atheists
and his followers would applaud this brilliant 4-D chess move that
owns the libs, somehow...
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #57 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 20 17:11

    
I'm sure there's a line, even for his followers. But the real
question is what it will take for the Senate and Justice Department,
currently in his pocket, to say enough is enough.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #58 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 20 17:18

    
Meanwhile, we should yank the trunk of the elephant in the room:
climate change.

"Is it wrong to be hopeful about climate change?" 
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200109-is-it-wrong-to-be-hopeful-about-cl
imate-change

"No individual will bend the emissions curve alone. No writer,
modeling team, no forest firefighter, no environmental lawyer will
carry the day. But if you’re looking for hope, there might be a
space in constructing something together – in responsive hope. No
single coral restoration programme will heal the wounds inflicted on
reefs around the world, but perhaps networks offer a way forward.
That collective goal, and the space of uncertainty in that
'perhaps,' is our hope."  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #59 of 169: Andrew Alden (alden) Thu 9 Jan 20 19:04

    
When it comes to climate, we're all Lilliputians, but together we can lasso
Gulliver.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #60 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 02:55

    

Via email from Brian Slesinksy:

"I'm wondering if anyone wants to comment on the state of the Maker
community? We might have had the last bay area Maker Faire last
year, though I stopped going a while ago since it seemed like I was
seeing the same stuff."

This subject of the Maker Movement is of keen interest to me
personally, because I was a columnist for MAKE magazine and curator
of the "Casa Jasmina" maker house-of-the-future in Turin.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #61 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 02:56

    

"Movements," as opposed to institutions, tend to go somewhere, and
then they stop.  So "Making" was an eclectic tumbleweed of a lot of
moving novelties that I enjoyed learning about, such as Web 2.0,
open source hard ware, 3Dprinting, artisanal electronics,
shareables, fabrication labs, public hacker events, sneaking weird
cyberpunk DIY personal projects into dead Italian factories, and
even more!  

I'm happy I was involved with that.  It was truly illuminating, and
worth every minute.  Thanks to Making, I'm much more at ease with
topics and activities that would likely have been forever closed to
me as a career novelist.   I know a lot more about material culture
now, and I'm even far more personally handy than I once was.

    However, fifteen years is a rather long time for any "movement."
Nobody talks about "Web 2.0" any more; the Internet was famously
"built with O'Reilly books," but Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon,
Microsoft, Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent, those vast post-Internet
entities are not built with O'Reilly books, and O'Reilly was the
source of Make, the way Whole Earth was the source of the WELL.   
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #62 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 02:58

    

      Even the Maker Movement had to meet some bills,  it couldn't
run just on raw joy and sweat equity.  For Make that was the
magazine, selling some tools and tie-ins, and throwing big,
profitable public events quietly underwritten by tech companies. 
Eventually they suffered a cash crunch when their discreet alliance
with the corporations broke down.

      In MMXX, if you're a tech company enamored with making, you
just build your own fab-lab in the basement and give it to the
engineers as a playroom/R&D lab.  You don't need hand-holding from
MAKE magazine columnists.

https://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/this-monogram-appliance-began-as-a-b
right-idea-in-a-makerspace

      These big-time sponsors figured out that they could have
trained professionals tinkering.  They don't need a massive popular
movement of random tinkerers tinkering -- that doesn't convey to
them any genuine research and development benefit.  Nobody tinkers
up a functional and legal mass-market stove or refrigerator.  
Makers are hobbyists and popular-mechanics people, they mostly make
toys, games, collectibles, costumes, and Burner-style FX
knick-knacks that approach technology-art, device art, and machine
art.  Activities dear to my heart, but they're not heavy industry
and they rarely scale.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #63 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 02:58

    

      Then there's the experience of the "Makers" themselves -- as
in, what are accomplishing here, what is your own end goal?  Is this
something you do on the weekends, like building ships in a bottle, 
or are you a designer/engineer light-manufacturer who is at it all
day?  If you're a professional craftsperson, you'll need to
manufacture instead of tinkering --- because"real artists ship." 
You want inventory, patrons, a customer base, maybe a brick and
mortar shop -- maybe you use some digital tools, but you're a
self-employed skilled laborer, and good luck with it. 

     If you don't ship any product, and you're a professional
tinkerer, then you're actually into "Makertainment" rather than
making.  You want to record and sell your process as a form of
monetizable performance-art.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #64 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 02:59

    

     Maker-entertainment is quite a different animal than the "Maker
Movement," because there's a lot more money and fame in it.  This is
Adam Savage pulling down Starbucks sponsorship money for harnessing
an aeolopile gizmo with liquid nitrogen.

https://youtu.be/aNTq7qOAFeg
 
     Okay, that monetizable Youtube stunt is super-entertaining if
you ask me, but it's not "making," even though Adam shows you
exactly how he makes it.  It's a paid commercial for Starbucks by
other means, and also, if you yourself screw around with liquid
nitrogen, you're gonna get frostbite scars.  Adam, by contrast, is a
globe-trotting veteran TV star with numerous employees.

      Here in MMXX, this is the post-Maker state of the art here: 
Adam Savage, pro entertainer and special FX dude. I have to say I
learn a lot from him, and I actually pay money to be a member of
"Tested."

It doesn't much surprise me that the show-biz aspects of Making
would turn into show-biz.  That was always the most Californian
thing about it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #65 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 03:02

    

     As for our  own"Maker House of the Future" in Turin, man, that
was super.  So much fun.   You would not believe the free, adulatory
publicity we reaped for that, especially my spouse,  "The Jasmina of
Casa Jasmina," the feminist maven of the "Internet of Women Things."
Jasmina became famous in Turin,  almost a mythical figure, because
she was the hostess of this avant-garde local house "Casa Jasmina." 

      That house was the only aspect of the Via Egeo ex-factory
complex that was much frequented by Italian women.  We had female
astronauts and female museum curators in there.  The female mayor
dropped by.  Some great parties, too.  All of the Torino Great and
Good were trying to sit on our squeaky plywood furniture.  It went
on for years!

    Today that factory complex is civilizing, normalizing, almost
gentrifying.  Via Egeo 16 used to be more or less a squat that
everybody ignored, but it got extensively renovated and is earning
money, so it makes no legal sense to have a place that is basically
a weird hotel room inside the middle of a design-office space.  The
legal contradictions of trying to do too much at once got in our
way, and also, Turin is getting rather sensitive about the
out-of-control AirBnB thing.  So, in Jan 15, Casa Jasmina ceases to
exist.

     A clean exit is never that bad a fate for any act of futurism. 
Casa Jasmina was becoming a showplace of aging Maker gizmos from
five years ago.  Also, Via Egeo still has a so-called "Fab Lab" down
in its basement, but I'm not sure why they need that MIT
nomenclature in 2020.  They could just buy the robots, routers,
laser-cutters, 3DPrinters, for they've become pretty standard.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #66 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 03:03

    

    At "Casa Jasmina" we never made any profit, because we also had
a covert alliance with a corporation.  In our case, it was the
open-source hardware outfit "Arduino," with CEO Massimo Banzi as our
maestro, theorist and gray eminence.  Like a lot of hobby startups
Arduino had some rough times, but they've pulled through, and at CES
in Vegas this year, out came the first mainstream industrial Arduino
product, the "Arduino Portenta."

https://blog.arduino.cc/2020/01/07/arduino-goes-pro-at-ces-2020/

The "Portenta" is not a maker-style "innovation platform," it's an
open-source heavy-duty industrial device, and why not?  I dunno if
it'll sell, but in terms of where the maker movement went as it
developed with the years, that makes sense to me.  You "innovate,"
and you either write down the experiment and close the lab, or else
it turns into something commonplace that is no longer "innovative." 
That's what the calendar is all about. Don't cry if it's gone,
rejoice that it was ever there.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #67 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 20 06:53

    
"Casa Jasmina" is over, but in the meantime, Internet-of-Things
industry booster Stacey Higginbotham says today that the entire idea
of a "smart home" has to be abandoned.  If they're run in the
surveillance-marketing fashion that they are today, no sane person
ought to trust one.

https://mailchi.mp/iotpodcast/stacey-on-iot-ces-madness?e=10392a4747

*Sometimes it's better to pleasantly waste some time on cool Maker
hobbies than it is to toss billions of dollars in VC money out the
window.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #68 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 10 Jan 20 08:27

    
I was never a committed maker, though I had connections to Make
Magazine and was part of an installation, at the first Austin Maker
Faire, on the "DIY house of the future." Mostly smoke and mirrors,
that installation had nothing to do with the Internet of Things
smart home/wired home mythology. It was focused more on making than
information systems: with advances in building technologies and
materials, we could have user-configurable homes, flexible modular
structures. Art generated from resident brainwaves. Consoles for
user-configured electronic murals and music.  Movable walls and
configurable rooms.

But I was more drawn to the culture than to the practice of making,
which had its beginnings with Whole Earth ("access to tools and
ideas"). The Whole Earth project was my most compelling influence as
an adult. It brought me here, to the WELL, and it encouraged my
eclectic, generalist mindset. I miss the Whole Earth/Point
Foundation organization and its many outputs, but I see the "tools"
aspect reflected in maker culture. We need a project to manifest,
again, the spirit of self-directed experimentation and adventure. A
framework for the curious, discarding passive consumerism for active
tinkering.

Bruce also mentioned Stacey Higginbotham's piece rightly
acknowledging that much of the "Internet of Things" framework has
been out of whack. What was missing - a strategic understanding of
what users would want in a smart home, vs a bunch of gadgets wired
together without a clear overriding concept of the value of that
integration. I like that I can control my thermostat from my smart
phone, but I don't need my thermostat to talk to my refrigerator or
my stove. It would be more useful if my home could gather data about
the environment and manage energy use based on some set of
user-guided parameters, and do that with complete security and
trust.  Also Pliny Fisk and I were talking years ago about building
just that kind of home, and networking it with the neighborhood, so
that there would be cooperative targeting of energy goals, and forms
of sharing so far undefined.  There could be a gamification aspect,
as well. As a by-product, you would have a more robust relationship
with your neighbors.  I don't see that happening anywhere, at least
not yet.

My last post mentioned climate change, and I'll repeat part of the
bit I quoted from a BBC article: "... if you’re looking for hope,
there might be a
space in constructing something together – in responsive hope. No
single coral restoration programme will heal the wounds inflicted on
reefs around the world, but perhaps networks offer a way forward."
Maybe we could deploy maker energy and IoT innovation, and build
popular networks of response to the crisis. I say popular as
distinct from government: it's clear that world governments are
failing to respond, so it's up to the rest of us to address the
problem.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #69 of 169: Bruce Fox (brucefox) Sat 11 Jan 20 16:31

    
Hi Folks,  Some newish things coming up in the last couple of weeks:
The Americans know who you are. The Americans listen to what you
say.  The Americans know where you are.  The Americans can smite you
from afar with no warning.  These are characteristics that only used
to be ascribed to the gods.  The Americans are doing these things
(for good or ill) on a regular basis in this last decade and pretty
much no one else in the world can put the combination together. 
But, like the gods of old, the leadership doesn't seem to have the
best outcomes for mankind as the central goal.  
  And the Iranians, trusting in their god, shot off what must have
been the entire year's budget for ballistic missiles in one go, with
a 26% failure rate and managed to not actually hurt anyone.  So some
anti-aircraft unit got "buck fever" and took out an airliner (oh
praise allah).  These nitwits, warned buy their generals to shut
down civil aviation for the hostilities went for the money and kept
the airport open.  I don't like or support Mr. T but it is clear
there are dimmer bulbs in the leadership of the world.
  So I wonder, will the next general of the Quds force want to be
out and about rallying the militias of the middle east when he knows
the Americans know who he is, listen to his every radiated
conversation, know his location, and can center punch his moving car
with a 50 Kg missile pulling the trigger half the world away?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #70 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 20 23:50

    
Speaking of artists who can make unlikely contraptions in their
garage, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art is having a
retrospective show of the technology art work of Rafael
Lozano-Hemmer.

He is definitely one of the most advanced and capable tech-artists
of this century. If you ever want to light up an entire city with
interactive lasers, Rafael is your guy.

https://www.wired.com/beyond-the-beyond/2020/01/rafael-lozano-hemmer-san-franc
isco-moma/

He's also the only artist I know who is Mexican-Canadian, which
seems like a really cool thing to be when you think about it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #71 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 20 00:13

    
Here’s a nice retrospective of “Electronic Dance Music” in the last
decade.  You’ll note that EDM has some inherent youth appeal because
your Boomer parents don’t like it, but also it’s the only form of 
pop music production that seems to be technically advancing. 
Nobody’s done anything new or remarkable with electric guitars in
quite a while — they have become as stable as the theremin, which,
in the year MMXX, is one hundred years old.  Mankind has had an
entire ecentury of electronic music….

https://pitchfork.com/features/article/2010s-reverberations-of-edm-skrillex-ze
dd/

EDM has got new methods of democratized production, with YouTube
tutorials, Ableton plug-ins, and sample packs you can buy on line. 
And then, if you’re a big draw and you’ve gotten to the arena stage,
you can wire up a bunch of LED billboards and put on a garish
multimedia show that’s basically a traveling theme-park.  And that’s
monetizable!  Wow!

“Whatever happens to musicians will happen to everybody,” and
really, the ruthless punishment these artists absorb, while
continuing somehow to survive and emit more or less coherent noises,
it just astonishes me.  Symphony orchestras and opera still somehow
exist in our world, next to these musical EDM entrepreneurs who
squeak by like self-employed circuit-bending crafts people from the
Maker Movement.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #72 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 20 03:06

    
*Okay, maybe it was a bit cruel of me to claim that the guitar is as
stable as the theremin, because of course you can plug grandpa's
electric guitar into an FX box that is basically an EDM rig.

https://neuraldsp.com/quad-cortex

*Lookah all the knobs and buttons on that! "Quad Cortex is the most
powerful floor modeler on the planet. With 2GHz of dedicated DSP
from its Quad-Core SHARC® architecture, this ludicrous amount of
processing capacity provides limitless sound design possibilities."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #73 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 20 03:08

    <scribbled by bruces Sun 12 Jan 20 03:08>
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #74 of 169: Gary Gach (ggg) Sun 12 Jan 20 07:11

    
<70> If I may pause for a moment on the San Francisco connection
here – it makes sense that SF MOMA is presenting this, rather than,
say, San Jose Museum of Art, now that the two cities have made an
historic handshake: Silicon Valley keeps the hardware, San Francisco
explores the software. It's a leap to say that rock&roll lightshows
of the '60s have evolved and transformed, but the fact is light is
becoming an element in public spaces here.  

No flying billboards yet, as from out of Blade Runner. It's still
all noncommercial and arty. Salesforce Tower has a different "movie"
that plays in its peak every night, barely recognizable images taken
from daily life transformed into shifting shapes and color form. The
Bay Bridge is also a nightly lightshow of sorts – thanks to an
outfit called Illuminate.org.     

Their latest, in Grace Cathedral, sold out for 2019 the moment it
was announced: a projector of 300,000 lumens has been hoisted up and
fastened into the flying buttresses to create a 100-foot curtain of
shifting light and color, in a space beside the interfaith chapel,
where the labyrinth sits, in a 15-minute composition of music and
light.

https://gracecathedral.org/events/grace-light/
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #75 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 07:39

    
This talk about lightshows and projections makes me think of Luke
Savisky's "Eye of Texas" projection on New Year's Eve 2006 in
Austin: https://www.austinchronicle.com/arts/2008-02-08/589099/ Luke
(https://lukesavisky.com/) has always been an ambitious and creative
video artist. Ahead of his time - he was doing this sort of thing
back in the 90s. The projections just kept getting larger.

Also around 2005-2006, while working with the Digital Convergence
Initiative here in Austin, I was engaged in speculative converations
with Kim Smith, who was looking ahead of the curve with flat screen
development. Kim saw the potential to have flat screens everywhere,
including massive displays. Prescient - I see screens everywhere,
some scaled to immensity.

Diverse shadows on our 21st century cave walls... What will the
2020s bring? More light, less shadow?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #76 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:38

    
We bloggers (or webloggers) around the turn of the 21st century
argued that our unfiltered and diverse voices would yield a better
perspective on truth, surfacing stories and details that mainstream
media would inherently miss.  Some of us had been trained as
journalists and advocated teaching journalistic process and ethics
to bloggers.  The Internet would bring the democratization of
knowledge, etc.  

Utopian visions of the future of the Internet always looked on the
shiny side and failed to consider the potential for wicked dark
clouds to form.  In fact blogs and social media were ideal petri
dishes for viral growth of malevolent propaganda.  And with the
mainstreaming of Internet access, access spread to populations not
known for critical thinking and discretion. Our efforts had evolved
an ecosystem for distribution of weaponized memes. This only sunk in
when Donald Trump, a grifter know for his Twitter presence and
cultivation of conspiracy theories, was elected President in 2016. 
Since then he's been aggressively constructing false narratives
while taking power (and money) and sharing with affiliated cohorts,
undermining democratic intention and the rule of law. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #77 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:38

    
As Bruce said earlier, Trump's ascendance reflects a global trend, a
reaction to globalism, to the sense of eroding borders that is
attributable somewhat to the evolution of the Internet. A backlash,
leveraged by wealthy opportunists and authoritarian bullies. 

That's one view, anyway. But the world is still spinning, artists
are still creating, makers are still making, opposition is
percolating, people (in the US, at least) still have jobs, inner
cities appear to be thriving, suburban dads are still mowing their
weekend lawns, retirees are cruising and watching their investments
appreciate... the world is full of contradictions. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #78 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:39

    
Half of America is fearing the worst, the other half feels safe and
secure with Mad King Orange's persistent sales pitch. How long will
they apply snake oil to their various wounds before they realize
it's not working, they're not secure or safe. In fact a storm is
coming, forecast by science, ignored by a faction more concerned
with short-term profit than long-term survival.  The mayor of Amity
Island ignores the malevolent shark approaching. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #79 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:48

    
What to do in MMXX? This is a critical time, we have to act on
climate change mitigation now, though now might be so late that we
have to focus on adaptation as well.  As individuals we can find
ways to reduce our carbon footprints, but individual action isn't
enough.  We need acknowledgement of the problem and urgent action to
curb emissions at government/policy levels, and within corporations.
We must vote for candidates who grasp the problem and are committed
to the challenge.  If you march in the streets, focus on addressing
climate change as your cause.

In his 100th Viridian Note, Bruce wrote:

"There are three basic activities we Viridians can fruitfully
pursue: we can create new concepts, we can spread ideas, and we can
be a moral force by example.

"Being small and diffuse is a tactical advantage for those three
activities. We can never expect to rule the planet by Papal decree,
but we're by no means without potential influence. Small diffuse
groups get quite a lot done in the world.

"If we Viridians successfully affect the course of events, it won't
be by lobbying, staging elections, shipping products, or passing
laws. It'll be by making a new world seem plausible, by becoming
early adapters, and by the Vaclav Havel method of publicly "living
in truth."

"Becoming an effective early adapter means finding new things and
processes, and making them modish. It's about cause celebres,
theatricality, publicity stunts, and hype.

"Creating buzz is something at which we Viridians should excel.
Besides, it's fun."

http://www.viridiandesign.org/notes/76-100/00100.html
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #80 of 169: Justin Pickard (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:56

    
Via email from Justin Pickard:

In <inkwell.vue.507.5>, Bruce mentions that neither Estonia nor
Dubai are, perhaps, quite as redolent of the future as they once
were. With this overarching sense of clumping or convergence, that
the differences between individual countries' fates are a matter of
flavour or degree, rather than anything more fundamental, I wonder
if a country-by-country weather forecast is the most helpful way to
be slicing things.

With that in mind, are there any smaller places (cities, landscapes,
retail parks, UNESCO world heritage sites, whatever) that feel like
particularly good points of reference, in figuring out the shape of
things to come? What about people? Any individuals we should be
keeping an eye on, or who aren't getting the attention they deserve?
And how about those things that overspill or ignore the borders of
the modern nation-state?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #81 of 169: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:58

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Besides show-biz, it seems like the other way for makers to ship is
using Kickstarter? Then you really need to figure out how to
manufacture stuff. It seems like a lot of Kickstarter campaigns fail
at various stages. They can fail up front by raising money, or raise
the money and then discover manufacturing is harder than they
thought and fail to ship. Or sometimes they do eventually manage to
ship, but months or years after they said they would.

Seems like if you succeed then you've started a small business,
which is great if that's the business you want to be in.

As a retired tinkerer I was thinking about what my deliverable would
be, and since I'm a software guy who's dabbling in hardware, I think
my shippable is a video and a recipe. So, I'm thinking about some
kid who watches the video and wants to build the thing for cheap.
What tools do they need, what parts do they buy? I could buy fancy
equipment for myself, but I'm not going to if it limits the audience
for my recipe. Downloading a pattern and ordering something cheap
from a laser-cutting service seems pretty doable, along with buying
some parts at Home Depot. There are services where you can have a
PCB board made, but I'll want to make sure the soldering is easy to
do with a cheap soldering iron and basic skills, or avoid it
altogether if there's a way.

If it's popular, maybe one of the musical electronics companies will
have someone in Shenzhen manufacture a nicer copy of it and then you
won't need to build it yourself anymore.

I'm paying some attention to the computer keyboard enthusiasts, who
pay surprising amounts of money to have a computer keyboard made
just the way they like it. (Or maybe to make videos with keyboards
in them? Hard to tell.) The keyswitches are made by a handful of
companies and there are tiny vendors who apparently buy parts in
bulk and sell them in smaller quantities, or assemble a keyboard if
you're willing to pay. I need to buy keyswitches too, so I'm glad
they exist.

This all seems like rather consumer-oriented behavior? It's what you
do when you can't find exactly what you want on Amazon and you're
enough of an enthusiast that you won't settle for what's out there.
The companies aligned with this behavior sell parts and services, so
you're still buying stuff, just different stuff.

It seems like show-biz and making stuff aren't entirely distinct?
People who watch cooking shows do cook themselves sometimes. This
might be more the lighter side of education. YouTube seems to be how
people learn things nowadays, if they just want to do it and not get
credentials proving you learned it.

Maybe education and show-biz are merging a bit? You have the
theoretical side where they teach stuff that there's no way you're
going to do yourself but is conceptually interesting, and then
there's the more practical side.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #82 of 169: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 08:59

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky:

Regarding the Internet of Things, it seems like a large subset is
the Internet of Cameras?

At our house it is mostly my wife who buys the cameras. We have
cameras outside pointed at the front porch where the packages get
dropped because we once had a package stolen. It's reassuring when
we're traveling. Also, we have a dash-cam because the other drivers
are crazy, though the dash-cam isn't on much and doesn't seem to be
effective for much of anything. A lot of this seems to be about
which side of the camera you're on, if it's pointed at someone else
you feel better.

I did buy a camera for my mother in the form of a Google Nest Hub
Max. This was strictly for easier video chat and it does the job. We
chat every morning, it's great. It's a nice photo frame too. But
getting through the install up to the point where we could video
chat was honestly scary for her. Particularly the part where it
insisted on learning to recognize her voice. It's like, a normal
phone doesn't insist on this, so why now?

But suppose it didn't need to be trained? It feels like this is a
matter of product design and technology getting a little bit better.
She is happy with the switch. You turn it off and it says
"microphone and camera are off!" This is just what people want.
Geeks may want a physical shutter or verifiable open source
binaries, but if your product says "microphone and camera are off"
in an authoritative voice, I think a lot of people will go for it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #83 of 169: Sigmundur Halldorsson (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 20 09:00

    
Via email from Sigmundur Halldorsson:

One of  the most remarkable TV series of 2019 was HBO's Chernobyl -
a story many of us are familiar with. The show was so relevant to
2019 as it had a very powerful comment on truth vs.
disinformation/propaganda "It [truth] is always there, whether we
see it or not, whether we choose to or not. The truth doesn’t care
about our needs or wants. It doesn’t care about our governments, our
ideologies, our religions. It will lie in wait for all time.” These
words from nuclear scientist Valery Legasov, who would then be
quoted "What is the cost of lies? It’s not that we’ll mistake them
for truth. The real danger is that if we hear enough lies, then we
no longer recognize the truth at all. What can we do then? What else
is left but to abandon even the hope of truth." - so have we reached
that point? Where we should abandon all hope of truth? Because there
was a very strong warning embedded in that TV series (and the
Chernobyl disaster as a whole) in that "Every lie we tell incurs a
debt to the truth. Sooner or later, that debt is paid." - so this
seemed to reflect the situation we are in right now. What with
alternative facts, climate change deniers, disinformation efforts
and all that - are we seeing a way out? At least I'm seeing some
tools to enable me to spot bots on Twitter - or is this state of
affairs working in favor of the oligarchy? So we'll get lots more of
it in 2020? Have we generally come to the conclusion that the
removal of quality control (aka editors) from the distribution of
"news" and "information" in the name of "democratization of
information" was a mistake and that we need solutions (be those
based on biased AI or biased people) in order to get away from a
world of alternative facts? Are we seeing serious efforts in this
area? 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #84 of 169: Kieran O'Neill (oneillk) Sun 12 Jan 20 15:05

    
I would note that it's very interesting to see Jon talking about
voluntary simplicity on one page, and the Veridian movement on the
next. I still remember Bruce's excoriating remarks about "hairshirt
environmentalism" from way back when.

But it's not a bad juxtaposition to be making. If you look at the
Millenial generation, we've been were propelled by a combination of
relative poverty and a sense of environmental responsibility to
pursue not-always-voluntary simplicity. But at the same time, we
were a more connected generation than any before us. Phones, tablets
and laptops were cheap. Rent, cars, property and all the traditional
accoutrements of the middle class weren't.  So you had "hipsters"
riding around on bicycles, growing organic vegetables in square-foot
raised beds, and making their own jam, while meticulously
documenting everything to their friends on Facebook, Instagram and
Twitter. It's been a kind of favela chic environmentalism.

And now Gen Z is coming of age, and they're more connected and more
economically disadvantaged than ever before. They're going to be
interesting to watch -- how they practice environmentalism, how they
organise, and how they vote, especially as the Boomers start dying
off. The statistics I've seen seem to suggest that Gen Z is more in
favour of race and immigrant rights, more in favour of gender and
LGBTQ+ rights, and more in favour of socialism than any before them.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #85 of 169: ixak (ixak23) Sun 12 Jan 20 18:33

    
As we think about the rise of nativism and anti-immigrant sentiment
across Europe and the US (and elsewhere), I was struck by something
I noticed in Uganda. Uganda is one of the larger refugee-hosting
countries. They have a population of about 42 million, and they’ve
taken in more than a million refugees, mostly from South Sudan and
the DRC. This type of activity isn’t exclusive to them, but it’s
worth noting in the context of their past history. In the late 80s
and early 90s, during the Rwandan civil war, Uganda absorbed many
Rwanda refugees, and future President Museveni incorporated them
into his military/security apparatus (even to the point of
appointing future Rwandan president Paul Kagame as his head of
military intelligence). There are those who see echoes of this in
the current Ugandan stance towards refugees – the DRC and South
Sudan are deeply unstable neighbors, and their refugee populations
provide touchpoints for Uganda’s regional intelligence networks as a
bulwark against current and future border conflicts and regional
upheavals.

Similar stances can be seen in Jordan and Turkey’s attitudes towards
the Syrian refugee networks – better to have fugitives from an
unstable neighbor who want or owe you favors than to make them your
enemies. This was also the US attitude towards Cuban refugees from
the 60s well on into the 90s, while the Pakistani government has
used FATA-based Pashtun factions to render parts of Afghanistan
unstable and persistently ungovernable since the Russians invaded.

In this context it’s useful to see where similar gates are open in
response to ethnonationalism’s rising tides. Certainly the
government of Bangladesh is absorbing Rohingya Muslims from Myanmar,
and if the BJP in India succeeds in its anti-Muslim agenda, both
Bangladesh and Pakistan will have to accommodate outmigration or
even expulsion of substantial numbers of Indian Muslims (in India,
even small percentages result in big numbers). Ethiopia hosts large
numbers of Eritreans refugees as well, despite minor thaws in their
respective relationships.

Which brings me to my point of curiosity – who’s going to do this
for the Uighurs? There’s 11+ million of them in China, and maybe
they aren’t fleeing in large numbers at the moment, but China’s
obviously concerned enough to toss 5% of Xinjiang into concentration
camps just on the off-chance that the Muslims there might continue
to feel less “Chinese” than would otherwise be desirable. If
outflows increase, it’ll be interesting to see who’s willing to host
them in ever-increasing numbers.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #86 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 20 00:16

    
https://www.politico.eu/article/fayez-al-sarraj-tentative-ceasefire-russia-tur
key-takes-hold-in-libya/

Here’s current developments in Libya, where the United Nations, the
European Union, and the USA are just sorta staring in bemusement as
Erdogan, plus Putin and his deniable offshore curator-army, have
arranged a Libyan cease-fire.  If there really is a genuine
cease-fire in Libya that is sustainable, then I’m not sure what kind
of hold the Turks and Russians have on the violent factions in
Libya.   Why would the Libyan warlords do anything that Turks or
Russians say — out of sheer gratitude?   

The Russians and the Turks are by no means natural allies, so it’s
hard to understand how they would jointly maintain a client state in
Libya.  How do they divvy up the loot without backstabbing each
other?

I'd be guessing that they somehow establish a duopoly-on-violence
and then settle in to drain different Libyan oil-patches, but that’s
not all that easy, either.   Everybody thinks the oil will pay for
the invasion and it never does.   So what are they getting into,
what’s on their mind?  How would they protect Libya from all the
other interested parties who have been destroying Libya all this
time, such as Egypt, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates. ISIS and
various Chinese drone manufacturers?  

Russian couldn’t defeat Afghanistan and Turkey can’t defeat Kurds,
so why are they begging for this new trouble?  Is it just Napoleonic
hubris from two tough-guy male oligarchs? 

Also, what if they win?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #87 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 20 00:19

    

It makes me wonder if “frozen conflict” might become a more general
situation.  Why can’t more people live  just like “Abkhazia,”
“Transdnistria,” “Crimea,” “Novorussia,” “South Ossetia,” which are
all fake-states under Russian protection?    As for Turkey,  it has
long possessed illegal “Turkish Cyprus” and also the new Turkish
protectorate zone in Syria that Trump retreated from, which doesn’t
even have a name yet.   I don’t expect the Turks to leave that area,
by the way.  At least: not Erdogan.

Maybe the Russians and Turks could become so geopolitically
influential that they can legitimize these various places they’ve
grabbed — (or, from their domestic point of view, places that fell
into their laps and that they are nobly defending from the likes of 
savage Greeks and Ukrainians).

In the case of “Turkish Cyprus” that’s been an unrecognized area
ever since the early 1970s.  It’s an anomalous zone, generations
old, that sustains itself mostly with gambling, retirees and heroin.
Imagine a vast planetary proliferation of Turkish Cypruses.  I’ll
give it one thing: Turkish Cyprus is a heavily armed Turkish
military occupation zone and it sure is “peaceful.”  I’ve been
there: you can hear a pin drop.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #88 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 20 00:23

    

Then there’s other people’s post-Westphalian land-grab problems,
occupied Palestine, Golan Heights, Kosovo… and endlessly “failed
states” like Congo, Yemen, Afghanistan…. If you add in the
possibility of waves of refugees,  as ixak23 remarks, due to ethnic
purges, or rising seas, in a planetary landscape that’s physically
unstable from climate change, you might be looking at a 22nd century
where national walls and borders are physically unworkable.  The
nation-state system, of staking out the acreage with gates and
barbed wire,  has to be abandoned like the Maginot Line.   You end
up with a different, novel, planetary security order, as in: what
mercenary army do you pay mafia protection to, and are you on
somebody’s belt-and-road trading system… 

A situation where nobody obeys nation-states any more, they’re
archaic, and you’ve got an oligarchic situation that looks more like
Dark Age Italian city-states.  Not any post-national “world
government,” but a pulverized world that’s got some networked
patches of high-tech governance on it, here and there, with vast
barbarian hordes of AirBnB nomads.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #89 of 169: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Mon 13 Jan 20 01:03

    
London looks like a city-state with an archaic nation state
inconveniently attached.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #90 of 169: ixak (ixak23) Mon 13 Jan 20 02:40

    
"The
nation-state system, of staking out the acreage with gates and
barbed wire,  has to be abandoned like the Maginot Line.   You end
up with a different, novel, planetary security order, as in: what
mercenary army do you pay mafia protection to, and are you on
somebody’s belt-and-road trading system…"

Well, GPC is back at the top of the agenda for the US State
Department

https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2019-12-10/age-great-power-competition


But internally they've changed a key word in the acronym. In a
telling revision (despite its usage in the linked article), it no
longer stands for "Great Power Competition" but now refers to
"Global Power Competition."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #91 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 20 06:25

    
I can't read the whole article at Foreign Affairs (pay wall), but I
see this in the second paragraph:

"... the United States is gearing up for a new era—one marked not by
unchallenged U.S. dominance but by a rising China and a vindictive
Russia seeking to undermine U.S. leadership and refashion global
politics in their favor."

The current administration has seemed to facilitate the undermining
of U.S. leadership, and the State Department appears to be in
Trump's pocket, so I'm wondering just how the United States is
"gearing up"? I suppose I should subscribe and read the whole
article.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #92 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 20 06:34

    
https://www.fastcompany.com/90450641/total-chaos-how-trumps-washington-is-kill
ing-the-next-generation-of-tech

That Fast Company article says that ideological chaos and government
dysfunction are undermining technology development in the U.S.: "But
Washington’s extreme dysfunction forces decision-making onto cities
and states. To make matters worse, extremists on both the far left
and the far right—who make up the majority of voters in low-turnout
local primary elections—now hold most of the power. When that
happens, balanced decision-making goes right out the window. So
instead of weighing the pros and cons of each public policy,
reaching a compromise, and then giving everyone certainty and
resolution, tech regulation today is a battle zone."

Consequently: "A world where Washington is unable to accomplish
virtually anything and where local governments are dominated by
ideological interests is a world that only puts us further behind
countries and governments that are still able to logically regulate
technology. It’s a world where we can’t protect kids from online
predators or consumers from overreaching monopolies because every
issue has to be relitigated dozens and dozens of times, rather than
patiently debated and resolved once and for all. It’s a world that
drives away new jobs and tax revenue for the sake of likes and
retweets."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #93 of 169: Kieran O'Neill (oneillk) Mon 13 Jan 20 11:04

    
Re: the Foreign Policy article, it's worth noticing that both
authors are Trump apparatchiks who left the administration to start
a think tank called the "Initiative on great power competition for
U.S. and allies/partners".


Re post-Westphalian limbo-states, how about Puerto Rico or Hong Kong?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #94 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 20 05:03

    
Justin Pickard remarks: 

“I wonder if a country-by-country weather forecast is the most
helpful way to be slicing things.

“With that in mind, are there any smaller places (cities,
landscapes,
retail parks, UNESCO world heritage sites, whatever) that feel like
particularly good points of reference, in figuring out the shape of
things to come? What about people? Any individuals we should be
keeping an eye on, or who aren't getting the attention they deserve?
And how about those things that overspill or ignore the borders of
the modern nation-state?”


“Well, yeah — people from superpowers tend to overestimate
governments and what they can achieve.  It’s often rather
superstitious, like the assumption that the Archbishop can lead
prayers about the weather. 

*When you’re in a small, weak country with a dinky, indifferent
government, people tend to tackle their big problems culturally.
“It’s really shameful and inappropriate that scandalous-person there
should be doing something so wicked that is so unlike
Us-Here-in-Ruritania.”  There’s a ton of that scoldiness in modern
social media because there’s no such thing as a legislative remedy.

*So if governments are less potent and worth less attention, what
matters now? — and I’m thinking it’s most likely oligarchs.  Why
waste time fretting about Republican elected officials, when
right-wing Congresspeople don’t care about each other?  Obviously
they care about Trump, the Murdochs and the Kochs.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #95 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 20 05:04

    


*It would be good to have some authoritative, vetted publication
along the line of “Foreign Policy” that covered the politically
active ultra-rich.  Admittedly, they mostly work though cut-outs and
think-tanks, they don’t hop out of the limo and personally kick ass
and take names, but it would make interesting reading.  Especially,
oligarchs themselves would read it.

*it’s not unusual that the wealthy should dominate governments.  But
the semi-covert breed of oligarch called “curator” is new — rich,
offshored warlords.  Maybe they’re better understood as rich people
usurping what are normally nation-state prerogatives.  Certainly
they’ve got as much wealth as many nation-states, and they also have
arms and soldiers. 

*Also, armed oligarchs, the curators, want to kill each other. 
They’re not, like, cordial rich-guy pals at Davos Forum.  For years
Erik Prince of Blackwater has been urging anyone who listens to
assassinate the Iranian General Suleimani, and Prince finally got
his way.  So you have to wonder if maybe it’s open season on armed
billionaires from now on.  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #96 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 20 05:04

    

*There are places on earth that aren’t in nation-states, like those
frozen conflicts and state-failure areas that I mentioned earlier. 
However, the truly novel development for 02020 is the
Xinjiang-style, Kashmir-Style, Internet blackout zone, inside a
functional nation.  

*You just shut down the cellphone towers and the routers and leave
the rebels to stew in their info-darkness.  India even blacked-out
their own capital for a while.  It would not surprise me to see this
practice spread or even get written into law: like, Kashmir is on
double-secret probation!  They can’t have any Internet or phones
until they bow the knee!!

*So what is daily life like in these newly-deprived areas?  We know
what a pre-Internet situation looks like, but a post-Internet
situation — what are the political implications?  If you live there,
what are you supposed to do with yourself?  

*In Cuba they have long had what they call “the Weekly Packet,”
which is a terabyte thumb-drive of, just, samizdat copied Internet
stuff for the blacked-out Cuba-zone.  It’s rather like a monthly
State of the World summary, but with lots of stolen entertainment.  

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/El_Paquete_Semanal

So should EVERYBODY read that “packet”? Would it do any good in
Kashmir or Xinjiang?  Should somebody build a USA Paquete, just in
case the Washington Post and New York Times get blacked-out as
enemies-of-the-people, or maybe a QAnon Paquete so you can continue
your heroic struggle against pedophile pizza parlors after Facebook
bans you?  Nobody has thought any of this through.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #97 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 20 08:23

    
Speaking of curators... all television news in Russia is in a
relationship to the state similar to Fox News' relationship to the
Republican party (which is attempting to become synonymous with "the
state," seeking complete and total dominance of government). 

A 2017 Guardian piece describes how it works: "... reporters working
for state news outlets – which effectively are almost all news
outlets in Russia – are public servants first and journalists second
(if at all)."

Interesting comment: "... in the US and in Russia, the media are
often distracted with outrage over absurd behaviour and nonsensical
public statements while ignoring what those in power want to be
ignored."

https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/mar/24/putin-russia-media-state
-government-control
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #98 of 169: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 14 Jan 20 12:39

    

"vast barbarian hordes of AirBnB nomads."

chortle!




i would love to see what a post-Internet something looks like. i would miss
y'all, but i'd welcome people existing in real life, engaging with their
real communities, coming out of their global-bubble-pods  to break bread
and fix roads and take on climate collapse together.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #99 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 20 13:38

    
Online relationships are valuable, we don't have to ditch those
connections in order to have physical community. They sorta work
together, in fact. We just have to define the real problems, and
deal with 'em. Spending time together online is not a problem, but
jacking in obsessively to the exclusion of other aspects of our
lives is most certainly a Bad Thing. It's okay to look through the
window of your device from time to time, but it's wrong to fall
through a virtual rabbit hole, to lose your sense of reality, to
confuse media with experience.

One of my talks was about a confusion driven by the persistence of
sci-fi notions in contemporary culture. Star Wars, Star Trek, Marvel
Universe et al have become myths that we almost believe. And we
believe without real evidence that time travel could be a thing,
that interplanetary travel is inevitable, that ships might travel at
warp speed through wormholes, that artificial intelligence will
evolve to resemble human intelligence/awareness. Our constant media
exposure to fictional narratives leaves us confused about what's
real.

Perhaps we should take more time to just be, to see things as they
are, to get to know our minds apart from embedded narratives.  

I've noticed in media an increase in horrific fantasy imagery and
narrative, and wonder what that's doing to our heads... to our
beliefs... to our expectations.

Garbage in... what's coming out?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #100 of 169: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Tue 14 Jan 20 19:27

    


totally with you on that, jonl! GIGO for sure. 

>  Perhaps we should take more time to just be

yes. i find it surprisingly difficult. my mind wants to spend all its time
chunking away at geopolitics and gender issues and community politics and
and and and. some of us require substantial amounts of time away from
screens and news media in order to recover a bit of sanity and balance. a
one-hour walk a few times a week doesn't cut it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #101 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 20 02:43

    
   Although I truly admire its honesty, and it even cheers me up to
see it said, this is one of the most wistful things I’ve read in
ages.  November 8, 2016: that dreadful day when Big Tech first
turned evil!  The day when WIRED magazine should have switched from
relentless Industry booster to a moralizing scold!  

   WIRED is a little late at managing that transition, but they’re
done it now.

    Poor WIRED!   If I could have shown this screed to Jane Metcalfe
and Louis Rossetto on the day they first appeared on my Austin
doorstep — “Hi!  We’re starting a cool new magazine in San
Francisco, would you like to write for us?” I bet they would have
run home to Amsterdam and cried.

https://www.wired.com/story/wired25-work-together-fix-mess-we-made/
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #102 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 20 02:45

    

https://www.wired.com/story/wired25-work-together-fix-mess-we-made/

    With that said, that said, in my opinion, the tech scene is
kinda overdoing it with the self-scourging tech-lash.  The techies
happen to be top dogs in a particularly rotten era, so people
naturally blame them for most-everything.  Also, the tech moguls
love the limelight and would much rather look like massive baddies
than just blundering morons who ran themselves into a ditch. 
Sometimes a hand-wringing mea culpa is a great way to play drama
queen.

    When you look around, obviously the other major industries are
just as bad or worse than Big Tech is.  Other big American
industries are not moral exemplars of corporate good-citizenship and
kindness to the user-base.  The US has become a crooked country, and
its industries look and act crooked.  

    Real estate is wicked, cruel, unworkable.  The car biz kills and
pollutes. The arms biz, it’s huge and takes whatever it wants. 
Aviation is crashing headlong, electricity blacks people out,
nuclear was an awful, irretrievable mistake in tech development…. 
Cable TV is blatantly corrupt and exploitative, the most fiercely
hated US biz of them all, while Big Pharma kills people outright,
and even agriculture lives on handouts….. The fossil-fuel biz is
super-ultra-terrible,  literal crush-the-world bad.  They’ve become
super-villains, in a trip-to-The-Hague level of
crime-against-humanity.  There’s never been a major industry so
wicked as people who can melt the poles, set continents on fire and
lie about it.  They make Zuckerberg look like a Teletubby.

     Even American church pastors are actively wicked in MMXX,
they’re become pro-Trump race-hate misogynists.  You couldn’t dream
of deriving a serious moral lesson from any major American preacher
— they’re men of God, but they’re starkly obvious nogoodniks.  Bill
Gates has ten times the moral authority of any American theocrat —
because  at least the guy’s a serious philanthropist who puts in the
hours.  America’s full-time ethical leaders are blatant Elmer Gantry
figures that no sane stakeholder would trust with a burnt-out match.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #103 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 20 02:46

    

    You can’t be a morally squeaky-clean commercial enterprise
within a corrupted society.  That can’t be done.  Professional
integrity isn’t possible either — the editor of WIRED is arguing
here that software engineers ought to act more like
engineer-engineers, but China is a Communist-engineering
technocracy.  China’s got engineers out the wazoo, and they’re
engineering Xinjiang and face-surveillance.  Osama bin Laden was an
engineer.  Engineers are just a profession like doctors or lawyers,
and those professions can’t look good when politics are crooked and
the health system kills people.

    The simple truth is, it is humiliating to live in an oligarchy. 
Injustice prevails, and most people have to sacrifice their freedom,
dignity and initiative.  It feels like a bad scene all around
because it’s indeed just plain bad, and with few paths of moral
redemption.   Cool hardware in your hand doesn’t redeem you from the
general air of corruption, arrogance, oppression, repression, and
all-around shame and sleaze.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #104 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 20 02:46

    

     Unlike this WIRED editorial, I don’t think that the tech biz
has the innate ability to grab its own bootstraps, clean itself up
and march ahead manfully.  That’s like expecting American
health-care to miraculously reform itself because doctors and nurses
somehow become more Hippocratic.  

   What will likely happen is no particular reform, or maybe bits
and pieces, while a Black Swan appears that makes all these concerns
seem irrelevant.  Reading this ten years from now will be like
reading about people trying to reform their videotape rental biz.

     Voltaire lived in an Oligarchy, and he was an Enlightenment
figure.  The lesson of Voltaire is that it’s better to be honest
than to try to be good.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #105 of 169: Bruce McLaughlin (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 20 08:19

    
Via email from Bruce McLaughlin:

Perhaps “sci-fi notions in contemporary culture” became popular
because people were looking for stories to hang all of the
technological changes we have been going through on.

I think “horrific fantasy imagery and narrative” may be an attempt
by people to come to grips with the global political move to
oligarchy along with the disastrous effects of global warming. In 20
years Game of Thrones may seem like a truer account of the world
than West Wing.

Over the course of history there have been human settlements and
civilizations run by people who did not value the truth. I think
that is where we are headed now. Pointing this out is not going to
be enough to stop it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #106 of 169: Alberto Cottica (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 20 08:47

    
From Alberto Cottica, via a mutual friend:

I enjoyed the broad, grim sweep of Bruce’s “everywhere is kind of
the same” in Posts 5 to 7. But I wonder: where does that leave the
European Union? That’s the one polity that can never go
ethno-nationalist, not without completely disintegrating. I live in
Brussels, with maybe half a foot in the Eurosphere. From where I
stand I can see the EU shudder and lurch, but to be honest I have no
idea where all this is going. The EU does seem to have a chance to
do something completely different – almost an obligation to do so,
just by sheer inertia in a world that has suddenly changed its
direction. The buzzwords are getting weirder (“Green EU Deal”,
“Internet of Humans”), and von der Leyen is still mostly an unknown
quantity.

Any intuition to share from you guys?

Thanks, keep up the good work!
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #107 of 169: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Wed 15 Jan 20 09:00

    
>>>
That Fast Company article says that ideological chaos and government
dysfunction are undermining technology development in the U.S.: "But
Washington’s extreme dysfunction forces decision-making onto cities
and states. To make matters worse, extremists on both the far left
and the far right—who make up the majority of voters in low-turnout
local primary elections—now hold most of the power. When that
happens, balanced decision-making goes right out the window. So
instead of weighing the pros and cons of each public policy,
reaching a compromise, and then giving everyone certainty and
resolution, tech regulation today is a battle zone."
>>>

Can we pause for a moment to laugh at, or cry over, what passes for
"far-left" these days in the eyes of a publication like Fast
Company? Most of the positions of today's Democratic Party activists
who are furthest "left" from the party's center would be perfectly
recognizable to FDR or LBJ. And not because those positions are
unpopular; but because one side has done a great job for the past
few decades of spreading reactionary disinformation, while the other
mostly dozed off and let it happen.

As someone whose job involves reporting on and analyzing
environmental and climate politics, I feel desperate for better ways
to describe positions we've called "right" and "left" for the past
150 years.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #108 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 20 10:49

    
"because one side has done a great job for the past few decades of
spreading reactionary disinformation, while the other mostly dozed
off and let it happen."

I would say that differently. I would say one side had declared war,
and the other side didn't have enough of a clue to realize it.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #109 of 169: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Wed 15 Jan 20 10:52

    
Very well said.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #110 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 20 11:47

    
I stumbled onto this one while trying to improve my mood and slide
the black dog out the door... One reason we have to be cheerful:
toilets are more effective than ever, and using less water than
ever.

"The long, sustained greening of American johns has been one of the
most transformative factors in keeping drought-stricken western
cities from running dry. The proof is in the water meters: In cities
from Denver to Las Vegas to Phoenix, water use is either staying
stable or going down, even while populations continue to rise."

https://reasonstobecheerful.world/how-toilets-saved-the-west/
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #111 of 169: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 15 Jan 20 12:04

    
in the spirit of 'as above so below'

larry lessig suing the nytimes for 'clickbait defamation'

the .org top level domain registry sold under stealth of night to
private equity.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #112 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 20 01:56

    

*The new World Economic Forum "Global Risk Report" is out for MMXX. 
I generally leaf through these every year.

*They rarely surprise me, but I enjoy reading the world's problems
framed in anodyne Swiss technocrat-ese.  It's language that's easy
to parody.  I could write just like that myself, if I didn't prefer
to discuss the same topics in a wisecracking, cyberpunk,
jargon-laden bohemian dialect.

*Normally the Davos crowd just worry about what CEOs worry about, ie
economics, but now they're plenty worried about drowning and/or
being on fire.  From a CEO's perspective, of course.

*I'm getting a little worried about the personal safety of the
well-to-do globalists who show up for Davos.  I'm not sure they
understand the moral effect it would have if some ticked-off
oligarch "curator" decided to strafe Davos with a drone.  Of course
everybody would assume it was some commie terrorist or fundie zealot
attacking the rich, but the rich don't get it about the predatory
rich attacking the Establishment rich. They don't get it that the
oligarchs are arming and there's no leash left.

https://www.weforum.org/global-risks
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #113 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 20 01:58

    

*Here's a few excerpted quotes from the WEF Risks Report -- I like
the way they class up our WELL discussion here. They should flash by
in the WELL discourse, much like Davos women of the European
mistress-class, sleek, multilingual secretary-assistants with
leather clipboards, who emerge from limos clad in Armani.  For a lot
of Davos attendees, it's basically a week-long event of top-end
sex-tourism, a kind of Swiss Ibiza with celebrity lectures instead
of disco.  You kind of have to see that to believe it, but, well,
that's who they are.

"Powerful economic, demographic and technological forces are shaping
a new balance of power. The result is an unsettled geopolitical
landscape — one in which states are increasingly viewing
opportunities and challenges through unilateral lenses. What were
once givens regarding alliance structures and multilateral systems
no longer hold as states question the value of long-standing
frameworks, adopt more nationalist postures in pursuit of individual
agendas and weigh the potential geopolitical consequences of
economic decoupling. (...)

"Amid this darkening economic outlook, citizens’ discontent has
hardened with systems that have failed to promote advancement.
Disapproval of how governments are addressing profound economic and
social issues has sparked protests throughout the world, potentially
weakening the ability of governments to take decisive action should
a downturn occur. Without economic and social stability, countries
could lack the financial resources, fiscal margin, political capital
or social support needed to confront key global risks." 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #114 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 20 01:59

    

WEF climate crisis MMXX, paging Greta Thunberg:

"Climate change is striking harder and more rapidly than many
expected. The&#8232;last five years are on track to be the warmest
on record, natural disasters are becoming more intense and more
frequent, and last year witnessed unprecedented extreme weather
throughout the world. Alarmingly, global temperatures are on track
to increase by at least 3°C towards the end of the century—twice
what climate experts have warned is the limit to avoid the most
severe economic, social and  environmental consequences.

"The near-term impacts of climate change add up to a planetary
emergency that will include loss of life, social and geopolitical
tensions and negative economic impacts.  For the first time in the
history of the Global Risks Perception Survey, environmental
concerns dominate the top long-term risks by likelihood among
members of the World Economic Forum’s multistakeholder community;
three of the top five risks by impact are also environmental (see
Figure I, The Evolving Risks Landscape 2007–2020)....

*The graphics are good in this "Global Risks Report."  I recommend
it. I pay attention, hey, I'm not even kidding.

https://www.weforum.org/global-risks 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #115 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 20 07:58

    
Increasingly often I have to turn off the news feeds, hide the
phone, ditch the computers, shut down the rather imposing flat
screen that fills our living room wall, and look outside the
surrounding windows, where the grass is growing same as it's grown
my whole life. Birds fly by and squirrels scurry along the fence. 
It's much warmer than before, but not yet distressingly so. 

While the world has changed so much in my seven decades, and change
has hyper-accelerated over the last couple of decades, I remind
myself that the computer-mediated world inside my head isn't the
real world; my newsfeeds don't represent reality accurately. When
I'm still, following my breath, everything is change and everything
his changeless.  In the wildest of times, silence is crucial.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #116 of 169: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 16 Jan 20 16:20

    
Climate change is giving us a physics lesson on momentum.  Seeing is
believing. The second derivative of ocean temperature is positive.  We are
warming the ocean faster year over year.

FUDDs Law:  If you push something hard enough, it will fall over.

Off to Davos to kick that around.  It turns out to be a banking problem.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #117 of 169: Gary Gach (ggg) Thu 16 Jan 20 17:13

    
Expand on that last sentence, a little, Bill?

( please ? )
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #118 of 169: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 16 Jan 20 20:45

    
BlackRock recently said they were going to take climate impact into
its banking decisions.  There’s certainly money to be made in the
transition to green energy.  
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #119 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 20 02:17

    
Okay, what is Vladimir Putin up to?  Why does he have to dissolve
his own government and fire everybody, when events seem to be going
great for him?  You’re not supposed to lead a revolutionary coup
d’etat against your own government when you yourself already control
everything in it.  That looks either Maoist or whimsical, and
neither one of those is good.

Maybe Putin’s trying to demonstrate that the legal Russian
government is paper-thin and he can actually rule by secret decree
by just using spies, “curators” and billionaire oligarchs.  Maybe
the facade of legality is more trouble to have to him than it’s
worth.  But people do like to have these cover stories.  If you’re a
spy and you have no cover story, you’re not even a “spy.”  You’re
just some guy standing on a heap of cash with a cluster of
headphones and telescopes.  People can see you.  They might shoot at
you.  You’re like a crab without a shell.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #120 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 20 02:18

    

Nobody seems to have seen this event coming, especially inside
Russia.  They’re just kinda standing around gawping.  I hope that
Vladimir hasn’t simply wigged-out, just gone unilateral and guzzled
his own bathwater.  Vladimir never drinks vodka, but he’s an old man
who still fancies himself as a muscular judo tough-guy.  An aging
man who dumps the mother of the children for a much younger gymnast
mistress, that’s the kind of guy who is gonna skin-pop a lot of
performance enhancers. Maybe his judgement is wandering, and he’s
getting impulsive.

I don’t think that Vladimir takes the Libya thing seriously, because
he shouldn’t be pulling an internally destabilizing stunt while also
launching a daring, offshored imperialist adventure.  Something’s
just not adding up here.  I guess it’s time for some Kremlinology.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #121 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 20 06:36

    
The Guardian has this Putin quote: "We all have to think together
how to build a structure of power so that it better corresponds to
the pre-election period and prepares the country for the period
after the presidential election in March." Their interpretation:
"Today's events suggested that Mr Putin was determined to install
trusted allies in positions of influence before his departure from
power next year."

CNN: "By taking steps to tighten his grip on power, Putin is also
sending a message to the wider world. More Putin in Russia means
more Putin on the international stage. And if the last few years
have taught us anything, that means a Russia willing to go to
extraordinary lengths to act as a direct rival for influence to the
US-led world order -- and create more headaches for America and its
allies."

Maybe he's making room in his government for an expatriate Trump? 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #122 of 169: ixak (ixak23) Fri 17 Jan 20 07:31

    
As far as Putin’s objectives in Russia and in Libya, he’s definitely
becoming concerned with his legacy. His actions in Russia are most
likely the result of cognitive dissonance between his desire for a
Russia with strong institutions that will survive him, crossed with
his desire to have those institutions subject to his singular
authority. You can’t have both, but he’s still going to try.

The Libya thing is far more complex, and raises the topic of what
Russia’s goals are in Africa altogether. The allure of having
leverage over a weak oil-rich state with Mediterranean port access
and (relative) proximity to both southern Europe and the Atlantic is
pretty evident. Overland access to armaments markets are also an
obvious plus, given the popularity of cold war arms and vehicles
across the continent. Just about every African country I’ve been to
that has an air force has a few MI-24s and MI-17s in their air, and
the reality is that you can buy 40 used MI-17s for the cost of a
single used Blackhawk helicopter. And like software, armaments
aren’t just a product anymore, they’re a service with ongoing
training and maintenance contracts that persist beyond the initial
weapon purchase (AAAS? Armaments as a service?). The utility of
Russian activity in a place like Madagascar is much less obvious,
but it’s definitely happening.

All of this happens at an interesting time for both French and US
military engagement in Africa. Recent French casualties from the
helicopter crash in Mali have spurred some reconsideration of their
role in the Sahel, but Macron’s paternalistic attitude towards
Francophone Africa has also triggered a “don’t let the door hit you
in the ass” backlash on the part of the various African leaders. The
US DoD is also rethinking their AFRICOM footprint and general
commitment to their African allies. This would shift the burden for
US security assistance in Africa almost exclusively to the State
Department, which is far less able to operate outside of major urban
centers in the more unstable countries. I mention this because
target locations for groups like AQIM, Boko Haram and ISIS in Africa
seem to be moving to weaker and weaker states that are less able to
control their own territory. The circumstances in Burkina Faso and
Mali, for example, have degraded dramatically just over the past
year, with extremist groups killing hundreds of soldiers, and
thousands of civilians in those two countries alone.

Understanding that there are plenty of good arguments for
anti-interventionism, what should be done for countries that are
outgunned by malicious non-state actors in their midst and
desperately asking for assistance?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #123 of 169: The ineluctable modality of the risible. (patf) Fri 17 Jan 20 18:58

    
> Russian governmental reorg.

Perhaps the simple story is not only simple but true: oil.

There was something I read at one point that I never followed up
upon: the biggest single part of the backstory to the collapse of
the Soviet Union had to do with a price of oil which, after the Arab
oil shocks in the 70s, cratered again in the 80s.  Apparent here:

http://chartsbin.com/view/oau

One part of that story is price-supply push: the price rises of the
70s greatly aided both North Sea oil in Europe and Alaskan oil for
the US.  It'd be interesting to do the research to see just where
elsewhere further new supply came online.

It takes time though for things to play out and it took something on
the order of 10 yrs before this really undermined the finances of
the Soviet Union.

There's a thing to keep in mind.  I worked these numbers once (but
don't have that in front of me now) - oil is king of commodities and
may represent half or more of all natural resource revenue
worldwide.  So as much as the SU/Russia has all these other natural
resources - diamonds, etc - income from oil is crucial and there's
no substitute.

John D Rockefeller said something to the effect of: oil is the best
business you can be in - and the second best.  When times are good,
profits gush.  Might be hard to know what to do with all the cash.

Proximately, oil again crashed from > $100/bbl to its present range
of 50-60 in 2014, so it's been half its former value for something
like 5-6 yrs.  It takes time for things to play out - and Vlad just
reorganized his govt.

The Russians are an ingenious people and I imagine there are a lot
of inside stories of the brilliant successes they've had
maintaining, and even [somewhat] increasing oil production in
Russia's aging fields.  That's a lot of the story why their interest
in the Arctic is so acute.  Even supposing effective Arctic
geopolitical brinksmanship, and the Russians seize a very large part
of the Arctic for exploration, the capital costs are going to be
astonishing.  This is not your grandfather's west Siberian field. 
It's part of the Russian shtick though to believe they can rise to
heroic deeds in particular (historically) those that attach to
taming new, and impossibly difficult, geographies.  We'll see. 
Declining demography doesn't help.

So Vlad, and the Russians generally, are in a pickle.  I think we
ascribe a Russian, or Soviet, govt more stability than is justified
and it's pretty clear how that worked out last time.  On the
positive side for them the economics of kleptocracy probably are
better historically understood than Communism so that helps - if
you're Putin & Co.

Cyberwarfare?  Still a sideshow to oil.  Hopes are high.  As far as
I can see the most successful cyber attack wasn't anything either
the Russians or Chinese did - rather it was Stuxnet which was the
product of an Israeli-US collaboration.

It would seem that the Soviet Union's, and Russia's, perennial
geostragtice role is spoiler and while it's a less expenisve
proposition than say hegemon, it still has its bills to be paid and
there's nothing even remotely on the horizon that can pay those
bills like oil.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #124 of 169: The ineluctable modality of the risible. (patf) Fri 17 Jan 20 19:37

    
This is always useful.  Where does Russia make its money on export
markets?  

https://oec.world/en/profile/country/rus/

It's dominated by the dark brown industrial category on the left
whose official name is "Mineral Products" where in Russia's case
that means hydrocarbons.  If I total the 4 largest numbers I get 

(+ 28 17 5.8 4.7)
55.5

55.5% of all exports by dollar value.  Actually, that's better
(less) than other oil exporters such as Saudi Arabia or Venezuela
whose intl income is pretty much all oil.

Wheat is tiny - in dollar value.  What about Russian arms sales?

https://www.army-technology.com/features/arms-exports-by-country/

For 2018, #2 behind the US but, while geopolitically important, arms
bring in only $6.4 bln.  Which leads me to wonder: is the Russian
arms industry even profitable and if it isn't it's a drain, but a
small one.  The Soviet Union massively subsidized arms production
(and one assumes oil income helped in that regard) and arms
production may well still be subsidized.  Probably provides a lot of
employment in a country that doesn't have many industries - to speak
of in volume terms.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #125 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 18 Jan 20 10:20

    
https://www.occrp.org/en/investigations/the-chefs-global-footprints

Here's an article about attempting to follow the "curator" Yevgeny
Prighozin by following his private jets.  Jets are still subject to
planetary regulation, so they're a traceable stand-in for Prigozhin
himself.  Even though there's no particular reason that Prigozhin
should be inside any particular plane (he has several). Occasionally
his wife and kids release a selfie from within a plane, because
they're not spooky "curators" themselves, they're just common,
everyday rich people.

 Maybe Prigozhin could cover his tracks in future by buying a fleet
of time-share jets, and then hopping on and off of them.  

Since Prighozhin came to prominence after the seizure of Crimea,
he's been in a lot of odd places.  Generally he sets up some
commercial enterprise on the ground in Whatever-stan, as well as
shuffling in some tough-guy militia.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #126 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 18 Jan 20 12:14

    
By the way, when Putin gets directly asked about Prigozhin, he asks
why the Western powers don't restrain George Soros.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #127 of 169: Gregory Prinsze (jonl) Sat 18 Jan 20 16:53

    
My friend Mark Petrakis posted this, written by Gregory Prinsze, on
Facebook:

"Democracy" was a temporary phase of history which allowed bankers
to take control from the earlier generation of dominant power
players: the Church and the old European monarchies.

Once the influence of the Church and the monarchies was sufficiently
diminished, the next goal for the bankers and their oligarchical
cronies was to increasingly take control of "democracy" itself, a
process which picked up momentum and sophistication throughout the
20th century.

The next steps are increasing privatization (already well underway)
and eventually phasing out "democracy" altogether. The final
destination is intended to be a global tyranny run by a tiny gang of
supremacist psychopaths and their technocrat commissars... a utopia
for them, and a cleverly disguised gulag for everyone else.

There's no question that this is happening, yet most people keep
relying on bankster-owned mainstream media for their "understanding"
of the world, and keep voting for the same old D and R
bankster-approved politicians, almost all of whom serve the
oligarchs regardless of party affiliation.

Control of the "education" system and mainstream media has played a
huge role in making this possible, but it's still obvious
nonetheless. So, why does it continue? Because of cognitive
dissonance, laziness, group think, and fear of being seen as an
"outsider" or worse yet a "conspiracy theorist."

The result is a political form of Stockholm Syndrome, and it will
soon lead to what Manhattan Project physicist Charles Galton Darwin
described as the perennial ruling elite goal: "A more perfect form
of slavery"... one in which the population is so perfectly
conditioned that they don't even recognize their own servitude. As
Aldous Huxley correctly predicted, they will be taught to "love
their servitude"... we're almost there."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #128 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 18 Jan 20 16:54

    
(That last was posted with permission from its author.)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #129 of 169: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Sat 18 Jan 20 16:58

    
...and it's depressing as hell. I marched today, not because I think
this or any other march will change anything, but because I want it
on the record that I disagree with the government takeover that
we're living under currently.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #130 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 18 Jan 20 17:00

    
I'm thinking I don't have a clue what's true anymore. We're in a
storm of conflicting narratives.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #131 of 169: Administrivia (jonl) Sat 18 Jan 20 17:10

    
Our MMXX State of the World jam is set to end Monday, which is
incidentally Martin Luther King Day in the USA.

Keep those cards and letters rolling in... inkwell at well.com. 

Keep reading and keep sharing: https://bit.ly/sotw-2020
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #132 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 20 01:52

    
*It's hard to count the oligarchs here.  On the other hand, it makes
one understand why Putin would say that Soros is the same as
Prigozhin.  Every player involved in the Trump Ukraine racket thinks
that Soros is the same as Prigozhin.  That's they're consensus: it's
all about oligarch-on-oligarch culture war.

*No wonder the top Republican guy in the impeachment is actively
involved in the scheme at the same time that he dismisses the US
Congress as a side-show.

https://www.thedailybeast.com/lev-parnas-dishes-on-kushner-maduro-and-soros?re
f=scroll

“The consensus was that the reason Trump had the Russiagate and
everything that was happening was because Soros and the Democrats
controlled certain U.S. embassies in Eastern Europe, particularly
the Ukrainian one, and were able to help with the Manafort stuff and
all other kinds of stuff that basically caused problems in the Trump
World,” he said. 

So the effort to influence Zelensky’s administration included
machinations against Soros, he said—in particular, to push Zelensky
to distance himself from people perceived to be close to
billionaire. That push and the push for political favors for Trump
were one and the same, he said. In retrospect, Parnas said, the
Soros focus grew out of an atmosphere he described as cult-like.
When asked if he believed his former allies’ claims about the
billionaire, he said he got sucked in at the time. 

“When you’ve got the president saying it, you’ve got his attorneys
saying it, you’ve got all these congressmen saying it, you’ve got
all these senators saying it—again, when I say Trumpworld, that
small inner-whatever, everybody would talk about it: ‘This Soros
guy.’ That’s why I look at it as a cult.” (((It's sort of like a
"cult," but it's a lot more like a group of courtiers who hang out
with an oligarch.  They're not supposed to be swayed by public
opinion, their whole purpose is in serving oligarchy.)))

Soros, a survivor of the Holocaust, has regularly been portrayed as
a super-villian in Kremlin propaganda, and some of Trump’s allies
have echoed that description as the president’s impeachment troubles
have grown. DiGenova sparked outrage just last month after claiming
Soros “controls” the State Department.... 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #133 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 20 02:01

    
*Not looking real perky in the Libyan "peace talks." The pro-Russian
side just shut off the oil flow while the pro-Turkish side is flying
in hundreds, maybe thousands, of armed Syrian war veterans.

*The twenty-first century's terror-war never exactly ends, but it
does tend to migrate from place to place.  Maybe the future really
is about Africa, after an entire generation of the Mideast getting
torn-up.


https://www.reuters.com/article/us-libya-security-envoy-idUSKBN1ZH0AQ
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #134 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 20 02:09

    
This Deloitte tech-trends publication is interesting because of its
bold lack of objectivity about the future.  On the contrary, it's
full of free ads for Deloitte clients of the C-level who appear with
head-shots say stuff like, "oh yeah, we believe totally in
(buzzword), we think it's great."

Of course Deloitte are just consultants, so maybe the tech-trends in
tech trends will be to get more to the point.  I can imagine a
Chinese Politguro approved tech trends where Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent
and maybe Huawei all appear on the same page and declare, "Well,
these are the tech trends because we're going to MAKE them the tech
trends."  Like, twenty-first century futurism with Chinese
characteristics.

https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/focus/tech-trends.html
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #135 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 20 02:55

    
*I can't possibly let a State of the World MMXX go by without some
mention of this fantastic Dominic Cummings meditation.  Cummings is
a top political advisor to Boris Johnson.

*The whole thing is good, with a lot of extravagant links to weird
things that a modern political operative ought to properly know.  
Then it ends with this declaration that he wants to hire characters
from science fiction novels.  Since there's no way Cummings can
actually do that, it's more the declaration that he WANTS to do
that, which is interesting.  

*A virtual character like the Idoru from William Gibson's "Idoru," a
modern government might be able to generate and hire a fictional
character like that.  As press secretary, for instance. Or a
completely fake Dominic Cummings, a political expert that you claim
to have on staff, but is not really there.

https://dominiccummings.com/2020/01/02/two-hands-are-a-lot-were-hiring-data-sc
ientists-project-managers-policy-experts-assorted-weirdos/

"G. Super-talented weirdos

"People in SW1 talk a lot about ‘diversity’ but they rarely mean
‘true cognitive diversity’. They are usually babbling about ‘gender
identity diversity blah blah’. What SW1 needs is not more drivel
about ‘identity’ and ‘diversity’ from Oxbridge humanities graduates
but more genuine cognitive diversity.

"We need some true wild cards, artists, people who never went to
university and fought their way out of an appalling hell hole,
weirdos from William Gibson novels like that girl hired by Bigend as
a brand ‘diviner’ who feels sick at the sight of Tommy Hilfiger or
that Chinese-Cuban free runner from a crime family hired by the KGB.
If you want to figure out what characters around Putin might do, or
how international criminal gangs might exploit holes in our border
security, you don’t want more Oxbridge English graduates who chat
about Lacan at dinner parties with TV producers and spread fake news
about fake news.

"By definition I don’t really know what I’m looking for but I want
people around No10 to be on the lookout for such people.

"We need to figure out how to use such people better without asking
them to conform to the horrors of ‘Human Resources’ (which also
obviously need a bonfire)."


*And, for good measure, here's a recent piece from British offshored
SF writer and journalist, about how the science fiction of the
1980s, set in the 2020s, differs from the actual 2020s.  Some food
for thought here.  Am I sorry I did it, now that a lot of it looks
pretty goofy?  No. Not really.  On the contrary, it makes me want to
write something about the 2060s.

https://onezero.medium.com/how-science-fiction-imagined-the-2020s-f8e98a5bc729

  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #136 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 20 04:13

    
Alberto Cottica remarks:

I enjoyed the broad, grim sweep of Bruce’s “everywhere is kind of
the same” in Posts 5 to 7. But I wonder: where does that leave the
European Union? That’s the one polity that can never go
ethno-nationalist, not without completely disintegrating. I live in
Brussels, with maybe half a foot in the Eurosphere. From where I
stand I can see the EU shudder and lurch, but to be honest I have no
idea where all this is going. The EU does seem to have a chance to
do something completely different – almost an obligation to do so,
just by sheer inertia in a world that has suddenly changed its
direction. The buzzwords are getting weirder (“Green EU Deal”,
“Internet of Humans”), and von der Leyen is still mostly an unknown
quantity.

Any intuition to share from you guys?

*It's all about Margrethe Vestager, the EU digital czarina.  She's
basically the only entity in modern tech that looks like governance.

*I follow Margrethe in social media and I gaze in mild wonderment at
everything she does... I think her aim is to tame Big Tech into an
enterprise that is more like aerospace.  Meaning Airbus style
aerospace, not like that American Boeing junk that falls out of the
sky.  

She's one of Europe's best technocrats. Pick of the litter, really. 
She's one of the least-scary power-players in modern politics.  If I
got email from Vestager, I wouldn't dive under the couch, I'd be
inclined to listen with care and be all cordial.  Whereas, if I got
email from Prigozhin, I'd be updating my will.

*With that said, though, there's something rather "curator" like
about Margrethe Vestager. It's like EU democratic politics just
sorta gave up and decided to let Margrethe handle everything because
actual governance  just gets in the way.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #137 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 20 06:25

    
Cory Docotorow waxes techno-utopian:

https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2020/jan/17/the-case-for-cities-where-youre
-the-sensor-not-the-thing-being-sensed

"The case for ... cities that aren't dystopian surveillance states"

"If we decide to treat people as sensors, and not as things to be
sensed – if we observe Kant’s injunction that humans should be
'treated as an end in themselves and not as a means to something
else' – then we can modify the smart city to gather information
about the things and share that information with the people."

City centers in large and popular metropolitan areas are starting to
feel more like theme parks. The people who live downtown pay seven
figures for condos in multiuse highrises. Tour guides are always
waxing nostalgic about how the city used to be a friendly and
affordable town, before the gods of commerce created the new digital
weather systems, raining profit on corporations.  Smart cities are
not smart for everybody. Ask the guy living in a box under the
bridge how smart he thinks the city is. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #138 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 20 07:26

    
Firehose media feed from Apple News, one of many sources of
patchwork news. Just part of today's feed, no wonder my head is
spinning:

Impeachment impeachment impeachment.
Amish sex scandals.
Meghxit
Immodium abuse
Conor McGregor's latest "ultimate fight"
Kidnapped teen snapchats a clue leading to her recovery
Trump's grudges
The FBI can unlock some phones, but not others
Ageotypes
Groom sexually assaults waitress at his wedding reception
GirlsDoPorn is no more
Trump "loves America" but hates American cities
Mrs. Maisel is marvelous
Amber Heard has a girlfriend
Kim Kardashian as criminal justice reformer
Casper, a mattress company that is a tech company
Roomba deals!
SpaceX launch
Apple's iPhone 12
Behringer clones synths from Moog to Roland
Police robots are not smart
Great USB hub!
The most excellent egg sandwich
Nazi propaganda in Brazil
Medicaid block grants
One Trump lawyer called another "dangerous"
Marlin Kemmerer wanted to hold Congress hostage in 1932
Biden Biden Biden
Bernie and Trump have something(s) in common
Guiliani ranting
Trump's legal wranglings.
Rebel Wilson lost weight
Reba McEntire is down for a "Tremors" reboot
US Companies pushing green energy in Europe
Google Home's music setup
Microsoft's new browser 
Natural alternative to diet pills
Lose weight fast!
Superfoods
Carb myths
Diagnosing flu
Giant squid
Hemorrhoid remedies
Coronavirus
Binaural beats
Relocating feisty lions
China phases out single use plastics
Wild bears in Alaska
Tunisia curbs coastal erosion
Solar power in Qatar
Daytrips
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #139 of 169: Lena via lendie (lendie) Sun 19 Jan 20 08:19

    
How is it that central and South America never are part of these
discourses?

So much going on there -countries like Venezuela imploding, native
tribes taking big corps to court, Amazon heading to ecological
disaster, how climate change is affecting the continent,
reforestation efforts where land has been logged out, oil industry
no longer pumping out revenues, general political governance heading
more and more to the right and cartels running Mexico - that’s all
off the top of my head.

I mean, jeez, if you wanna be all grim and depressed, take some big
looks there.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #140 of 169: Bruce McLaughlin (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 20 17:10

    
Via email from Bruce McLaughlin:

In his book, “Capitalism in the 21st Century,” Thomas PIketty
suggests that wide income disparity with a small group at the top is
the equilibrium state of capitalism. Events where large amounts of
capital are destroyed (wars, depressions, disasters, etc.) knock the
system out of equilibrium. What happens afterwards is that capital
owners have to pay people to rebuild (growth), rather than charging
them as much as possible for being alive (rent seeking).

With this theory he explains the post WWII prosperity in Europe,
Japan, and the US, along with the post WWII, Civil War, Famine, and
another Civil War prosperity of China. China was in the right phase
of development to be low bidder on the job of making a smartphone
for everybody on the planet, which extended their prosperity. They
are heading back to equilibrium now.

What makes the current cycle different from older cycles like the
Gilded Age in the US? Computers, cheap and fast communication and
transportation, cheap and deadly weapons. How will the oligarchs use
these new capabilities in the next decade? It’s not going to be
pretty...
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #141 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 20 Jan 20 02:00

    

*Well, it seems that everybody in the world agrees that the Libyans
ought to stop fighting, including the Russians, the Turks and even
the Libyan factions.  I hate to play the cynic here, because it
would be great to see an oil war negotiated away.  "Peace Breaks Out
in MMXX," that would be fabulous news.

*However, I have a sneaking suspicion that this cordial national
paperwork implies that the situation is about to explode with
extra-national proxy actors.  I'd be happy to be proven wrong.

*At least The Donald's not involved, so who knows, maybe this Berlin
agreement really is good news for the state of our world. 

*It's also of considerable interest that Prime Minister Boris
Johnson would simply stroll up to Putin face to face in Berlin and
tell Putin to knock it off with poisoning people (at least in
Britain).  Of course everybody knows Putin did that, while Johnson
lives in his own fantasy world and will riff nonsense at any length
about anything.  Still, it's odd that BoJo would just,
undiplomatically, truth-bomb that in a way, and in venue,  where all
the heavy players would overhear.  Boris Johnson is truly a strange
guy.  If his underling wants to recruit "super-talented weirdos,"
he'll have a hard time hiring someone weirder than the boss.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #142 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 20 Jan 20 02:02

    


*Some of the Libya reportage from "Politico Europe."

"DIPLOMACY STILL WORKS: The international community, or at least the
parts that are most influential in Libya, agreed on a 55-point,
nine-page document at a conference hosted by German Chancellor
Angela Merkel in Berlin on Sunday. They call for the return to a
political process in the country, and most importantly, say they
will refrain from military interventions and respect the arms
embargo in place. The signatories include Russia, Turkey, Egypt and
the Emirates — which were represented at the highest level. Here
are the conclusions."

(((There's the pdf of the English-language version of the new
treaty.  It's odd to be in an era where they just pop up and you can
thumb through 'em for yourself.)))

https://www.bundeskanzlerin.de/resource/blob/656734/1713866/7982684117074dea50
70983ebb136249/2020-01-19-berlin-conference-on-libya-data.pdf

"Now the hard(er) part: Following up, implementing and guaranteeing
the agreement holds will be the next — difficult — task; EU foreign
ministers will attempt to do so as early as today at a meeting in
Brussels...."  (((Every government finds it easy to agree on
not-shipping arms, because all the arms-shipping is being done by
"curators," not governments.  There's a rumor that the current
leader of Chechnya, Ramzan Kadyrov, may be appointed by Putin as a
kind of satrap of Syrian and Libyan affairs.  If so, well, that
Kadyrov guy's a complete savage.  He's up for anything.)))

"Putin also squeezed in a tête-à-tête with British PM Boris Johnson,
who told him that Britain is still furious over the attempted
assassination of former Russian intelligence officer Sergei
Skripal in Salisbury in March 2018, and that U.K.-Russia relations
can’t return to normal yet."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #143 of 169: The ineluctable modality of the risible. (patf) Mon 20 Jan 20 12:26

    
Libya's oil reserves, esp. with US fracked oil now in the global
equation, aren't considerable - at least in terms of the world price
of oil or geostrategically generally - so I assume the interest of
Libya, in particular for Russia, but Turkey as well, is as one more
lever that might destabilize Europe.  And not just for Libyans
leaving the country, since that population isn't large (Libya has a
population of only 6.375 mln.), but in particular other people
elsewhere in Africa (or futher east in the ME even as far as
Afghanistan) who want to flee to Europe.

https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/italian-foreign-minister-luigi-di-m
aio-europe-stands-to-lose-the-most-a-a4453de7-d1e8-464b-b220-c3cbbd153cab

There are currently 700,000 migrants in the country who want to go
elsewhere and that can pretty much only be Europe.

I imagine Johnson is feeling vindicated and in a position of
strength given the Conservatives' powerful December electoral
victory.  Labor in disarray, etc.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #144 of 169: Lena via lendie (lendie) Mon 20 Jan 20 18:19

    
 

                   <rant on>

You guys should be ashamed of yourselves.  White guys pontificating
about the state of the world leaving out half the world - curiously
the brown and black part - Latin America and Africa.  I've begun to
suspect this is partically ignored because it is outside your
comfort zones or knowledge zones or interest zones so half the world
simply doesn't appear on the globes that you look at.

You could write a state of the world based on the Amazon and I'd bet
it *would* be a state of the world.  The environmental and
ecological issues alone affect the entire planet.

Latin America and Africa may not be the players of your world but
god knows without them there wouldn't be much of your world.  They
are exploited by the world you speak of - Eurocentric, US, Putin (do
you call it Russia these days, heck if I know or care), China,
Middle East Oil.  

This other half of the world is starving, much without potable
water, just barely surviving, without agency.  Latin America doesn't
have refugees, Africa has those. 

You can talk about oil yet here and getting closer is a huge water
problem that could instigate wars.  There isn't enough and more
there isn't enough clean water without toxins.  Australia is already
in the throes of dealing with this - desalination projects happening
or in the works.  Who's the likely leader and knowledge center? 
Israel.

What about looking at the state of the world through humanity?  One
that has decreasing empathy, increasingly tolerates sociopathy, has
less and less sense of the common good and welfare and increasingly
creates tribes (special interest groups) pitting themselves against
each other (or manipulate a la "Let's you and him fight")thus losing
what agency they had in the larger view, one that uses chemicals and
toxins to grow foods at the same time as they destroy the earth they
use?  

Where is love or kindness or compassion in any of these worlds?

How about discussing these things?

                       <rant off>
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #145 of 169: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Mon 20 Jan 20 19:29

    
(Cheering)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #146 of 169: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Mon 20 Jan 20 19:43

    


bravo, lendie! wow.

yes. i want to hear about that state of the world, or the state of that
world.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #147 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 21 Jan 20 02:25

    
Hey, <lendie>, thanks for the rant! I would feel more ashamed if I
pretended any kind of expertise about the Global South, but we
certainly welcome contributions like yours. 

The true "state of the world" is so much more than any of us can
grasp. I often feel like the blind man who happened to grab the
elephant's rectum, the world being so much more than I can ever
know, the awesome and terrifying breadth of global diversity. If we
think we know the world because we "read the news," we're just
kidding ourselves.

Especially if we think we know something because we were watching
Fox News, or MSNBC, or CNN, which are all about divisive politics.
Those cable channels facilitate by attention and misrepresentation
the power of the corrupt and unhinged. 

The exclusion of the Global South is unfortunately too common...
check out
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/15/opinion/politics-global-south.html

"... the global South has often been well outside the spotlight.
Much of our global attention and reporting have been focused on the
deceptions and distortions afflicting elections in the industrial
West, such as those that unfolded amid the U.S. presidential race in
2016.

"There is a grave danger in overlooking the consequences of this
inattention, not only in terms of global democratization and
democratic consolidation, but also in the specific ways the use of
social media is impacting democratic processes in the South."
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #148 of 169: Lena via lendie (lendie) Tue 21 Jan 20 02:38

    
So how are you going to change this next year?
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #149 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 21 Jan 20 04:51

    
Uhm, Libya is in Africa.

Venezuela is a kind of South American Libya.  Maybe some day someone
will write a definitive history about their endless panoply of
curses and disorders.  It's frankly beyond me.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #150 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 21 Jan 20 05:02

    
It seems that Holly Herndon and Mat Dryhurst will not be able to
join us (unless they show up afterward for a post-midnight set). 
They got caught up in touring to support the new album.   It’s a
pity, because as musicians go they’re about the most erudite and
chatty ones that I’ve ever met.

As for next year, maybe Lauren Beukes could be persuaded to show up.
She’s the most cyberpunk South African ever.  Also, her new sci-fi
short story collection “Slipping” is pretty good.

I’m a little embarrassed that I didn’t say more this year about the
ongoing ruckus in India.  I met some science fiction writers in
Bangalore last year, so now I kinda know what gives with them
social-media-wise, and man are they upset in MMXX.  I’ve never seen
such politically ticked-off science fiction writers.  They’re
yelling their heads off, but everybody’s too busy impeaching
Presidents or breaking up Europe to keep up with India.  Or Hong
Kong either, where the intelligentsia are smoldering every day.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #151 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 21 Jan 20 05:17

    


After the State of the World closes, I’ll be devoting some attention
to jury duties for our electronic art festival in Turin, “Share
Festival.”  The theme for MMXX is “Riots: Here We Are.”

A rather apt and timely theme, I hope you’ll agree.  There’s still a
week or so to send in entries if you are into the production of
net.art, device art, machine art, code art, generative art and that
good-old-fashioned formerly-new media.

https://www.toshareproject.it/call-for-share-prize-xiii-edition-riots-here-we-
are/

And if you’re up for the big time of tech art, why not “Ars
Electronica”?  It’s got the “Golden Nica,” the Oscar of the tech art
world.  

******

Prix Ars Electronica 2020
Submit your entry now to the most traditional media art competition
in the world!

The following categories will be announced for the 2020 Prix Ars
Electronica:
Computer Animation, Digital Communities, Interactive Art + and u19 -
create your world. 

The winners will receive the prestigious Golden Nicas, prize money
of up to 10,000 euros per category and a prominent appearance at the
Ars Electronica Festival in Linz 
(9 to 13 September 2020).

You can find out how to submit or nominate your artistic project at
ars.electronica.art/prix! The submission deadline is March 2, 2020.
The participation is free of charge.

Since 1987, the Prix Ars Electronica has been held annually for
media artists from around the world. You’ll be able to find out
which Prix jurors the many artists will be able to present this year
and which projects have been submitted and awarded prizes on our Ars
Electronica Blog.

We are looking forward to your submission and wish you good luck!

Your Ars Electronica Team

*****

Every year I do this jury work, and really, the panoply of ingenuity
there always impressed me and raises my morale.  So many strange,
creative, inventive things from a some basement, some attic, some
home-made lab in the corner of whateverness.  It gives me a baseline
faith in the resilience of humanity.   Not that things are always
good —that’s too much to ask — but that they’re always interesting. 
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #152 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 21 Jan 20 09:40

    
It's been two weeks; this is when we normally end the conversation.
But it's a soft stop, the topic is open for more posts. Feel free to
continue.

Thanks to all who've contributed, from on or off the WELL. Hopefully
we're all gaining insight. It's been a bit bleak this year... the
pendulum's swung to a dark place. But we're here for each other, and
we can always hope...
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #153 of 169: Angie Coiro (coiro) Tue 21 Jan 20 10:07

    
That's lovely, Jon. Thanks for that thought.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #154 of 169: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 21 Jan 20 15:06

    
(Blushing!)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #155 of 169: George Mokray (jonl) Tue 21 Jan 20 15:07

    
Via email from George Mokray:

If you want to know how to save coral reefs, you shouldv  talk to
Tom Goreau of the Global Coral Reef Alliance
(http://globalcoral.org).  Tom uses Wolf Hilbertz' biorock
technology which should make Bruce Sterling happy as he uses the
idea in one of his novels.  Tom is also one of the leaders of the
geotherapy (NOT geoengineering) community.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #156 of 169: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 21 Jan 20 18:17

    
I came late to reading this this year, and just want to thank Jon,
Bruce, and everyone who came in with some really substantial
questions and comments and perceptions.

The dark mood feels right to me, given the state of the world, and
any glimmer of reason to hope (as the post just before this is, as
well as Jon's) is greatly appreciated.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #157 of 169: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 22 Jan 20 01:21

    
Thirty-three years of Boing Boing.  Nobody's perfect, and things
don't always go well, but there's a lot to be said for tenacity.  

*And the long-standing WELL, too, may it find favor among the gods;
when the WELL was a bulletin-board-system, I once found its server
and sat on it.

https://boingboing.net/2020/01/21/boing-boing-is-20-or-33-year.html

With any kind of luck, we'll be back next year.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #158 of 169: John Spears (banjojohn) Thu 23 Jan 20 08:43

    
Btw, what will historians call this age? 

The Anti-enlightenment? 

The Age of Fake?(from fake news to fake impeachment trails, etc)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #159 of 169: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Thu 23 Jan 20 08:59

    
I'm not so sure there will be historians all that much longer.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #160 of 169: David Gans (tnf) Thu 23 Jan 20 09:34

    

The Great Endarkenment
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #161 of 169: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 23 Jan 20 11:05

    
Or if we may be extremely lucky as well as extremely proactive, The
Small Endarkenment.

(great phrase, gans)
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #162 of 169: David Gans (tnf) Thu 23 Jan 20 12:52

    
It did not originate with me, but I put it into a song:


Endarkened forces are clamping down
On us unconfirming souls
Waving flags and bashing "fags"
And burning truth like coal
Now, I don't know but I've been told
The naming rights have all been sold
Hell is hot and heaven's cold, and

It's gonna get worse before it gets better
It's gonna get worse before it gets better
It's gonna get worse before it gets better
But I know it's gonna get better
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #163 of 169: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 23 Jan 20 13:23

    
2020 is our 35th year as well.sf.ca.us, aka well.com .

Chinese New Year begins this weekend.  Wrap up your loose ends, pay
your bills.  The Year of the Metal Rat, the start of a 12 year metal
cycle.

Anything you’d like to opine about rats or metal?   
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #164 of 169: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Thu 23 Jan 20 13:24

    
I envy you your gift for your gift for words, and your optimism.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #165 of 169: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Thu 23 Jan 20 13:25

    
Slip.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #166 of 169: David Gans (tnf) Thu 23 Jan 20 16:59

    
> and your optimism

"Hope is an obligation," as <mtheo> once said in a very different context.
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #167 of 169: John Spears (banjojohn) Fri 24 Jan 20 13:08

    
Thank you, Gans, the Endarkening is right on target, hopefully not
the Great Endarkening....

Great lyrics, too, but I can't say I feel the optimism expressed the
last line. I suspect that's part artistic license. I often think
about Dylan's lyric, penned a few years ago: "it's not dark yet, but
it's getting there...".
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #168 of 169: Stuart (sjs) Mon 27 Jan 20 05:39

    
I met a young girl, she gave me a rainbow
  

inkwell.vue.507 : State of the World 2020: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #169 of 169: Vasilios Koronakis (jonl) Wed 29 Jan 20 08:12

    
Via email from Vasilios Koronakis:

Bravo, bravo Lena! (re <inkwell.vue.507.144>)
  

