inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #0 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 2 Jan 11 08:20

    
Bruce Sterling is a science fiction author, journalist, speaker, and 
citizen of the world, spending much of his time on the road, in Serbia, in 
Italy, and in the U.S. He's traveled broadly all his life, and has 
cultivated a global perspective which informs his writing, both fiction 
and journalism. He has focused on the cutting edges of Internet and hacker 
cultures, environmentalism, and global politics, and more recently he has 
become a critic of design and proponent of "design fiction."

Jon Lebkowsky is an Internet expert, evangelist, and consultant, social 
commentator, gonzo futurist, media analyst and critic, organizer and 
activist based in Austin, Texas. He's cofounder and Chief Digital Officer 
of Plutopia Productions, a future-focused events, entertainment, and media 
company.  

This is their eleventh annual State of the World conversation on the WELL. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #1 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 2 Jan 11 09:11

    
Hello to all, welcome to the party. This conversation should run about
a week. You can join the conversation even if you're not a member of
the WELL, by sending comments and questions to inkwell at well.com.
We're also experimenting with a Facebook event page for feedback - it's
at https://www.facebook.com/event.php?eid=170315026343207&ref=ts.

I'm not clear whether the world was more demented than usual in 2010,
or the general craziness was just better documented than ever before.
Either way, there's a lot of real meat on this year's plate. I want to
open with the top story at Global Voices in 2010:
http://globalvoicesonline.org/2010/06/14/brazil-the-cala-boca-galvao-phenomeno
n/
 There was also a report in the NY Times:
https://www.nytimes.com/2010/06/16/nyregion/16about.html

Here's a summary: Galvão Bueno is a famous Brazilian broadcaster, and
is always the narrator for the Brazilian football (soccer) and
volleyball matches, even though many consider him unbearable. During
the 2010 World Cup the phrase "Cala Boca Galvão" trended 'way up on
Twitter - Brazilians were tweeting it like crazy. It means "Shut up,
Galvao!"

What's funny is that Twitter users outside Brazil totally misread the
phrase, saying it was part of a campaign to save a rare and endangered
species of bird in Brazil. Brazilians picked up on this, and went along
with the wrong interpretation, also suggesting that it had something
to do with some kind of remedy, a new single from Lady Gaga, etc.

Real Tower of Babel stuff - "the power of social media."

Bruce, what's trending in your Twitterverse?  Are they bouncing the
announcer or saving the bird?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #2 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 2 Jan 11 14:23

    
I'm still very much on Twitter, and I'm keener on Brazil than I was a
year ago, but I never follow anything "trending" on Twitter. Twitter's
trends have become way too big to be genuinely trendy.

I did spend a month in Brazil at the end of 2010.  I was in Belo
Horizonte, Sao Paulo and Brasilia.  Looks like I'll be going back this
spring, too, likely to Curitiba and Rio.

Brazilians are notorious for their Twitter fever.  I'm following quite
a few Brazilians nowadays on Twitter, including the new president
Dilma Rousseff (the female former underground activist/urban
guerrilla).  The former president, Lula, recently declared that in his
retirement he's going to spend his free time tweeting and blogging.  

Brazilians I earnestly queried about this assured me there was no way
Lula was turn into a full-time Internet maven.  They opined that Lula
was just joshin' around...  But I dunno.  I think it makes a lot of
sense for former or wannabe world leaders to pull a Sarah Palin, and
infiltrate Twitter.  For Lula, that would beat the heck out of writing
some boring memoir or trying to do Brazilian talk shows.  Conventional
media in Brazil has never been his friend.

At the moment, I'm in Belgrade.  We've been moving house within the
town -- from the formerly-Ottoman district to the formerly
Austro-Hungarian district.  It's mildly snowy, it's low-key, and my new
apartment lacks broadband as yet.  I also managed to mildly bonk my
thumb while doing home repairs.  If I sound a little more terse this
time during this -- what? the twelfth go-round? -- it's all about the
bandaid and the hardware.

"What I saw on my December summer vacation," etc:

http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/sets/72157625515739725/

*Innocent people used to be relatively safe from the supreme boredom
of other people's tourist photos, but this is a network society, so,
not any more.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #3 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 2 Jan 11 18:03

    
But we can always filter the photos intelligently. The blitz of
photos, event reports, notes about parties, augmented reality checkins
from exotic places etc. are kind of cool, they give a swirling sense of
connectedness to the noosphere. On the neurotic side of the equation,
there's a low internal moan about all the places you're not, and
disruption of focus on where you actually are. Nice photos, by the way.

On another subject,  couple of posts ago on your blog, you linked a
terrific DesignBoom piece on design fiction from the UK's Dunne & Raby
studio:
http://www.designboom.com/weblog/cat/8/view/12673/dunne-raby-at-saint-etienne-
biennale-2010.html
"... the project presents scenarios for various design proposal[s] and
how they could be utilized in our contemporary world, looking beyond
how things are being designed now and how they should begin to be
designed, imagining alternative possibilities and different ways of
being, giving tangible form to new values and priorities."

You've been tracking the world of design and the emerging discipline
of design fiction - what's newest and most interesting in the world?
What real world impacts are we seeing from "design fiction" scenarios?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #4 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 01:33

    
*Well, once I get all fully wound-up on "design fiction," we're gonna
be in for it...  There's gonna be some design-professor peroration like
that outburst last year about the "decline of consumerism."

*So it you never heard of design fiction, well, here's the jackdaw
heap of goodies.  I suggest you check this out and brace yourself.

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/category/design-fiction/
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #5 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 01:52

    
*Then there's the subject of the photos, which I'm not ready to let go
of -- any more than I can let go of making them.

*I've got almost seven thousand photos in that FlickR heap now.  That
doesn't even count the ones I discarded myself.  And people do watch
'em.  Somehow I got enough FlickR and Yahoo juice that I get about 150
hits a day.  Each and every day now.  It seems to be ramping up.

*The social interest in my photos is fascinating to watch.  I'm pretty
sure that 80 percent of these viewers have no idea that it's me. 
They're looking for search words:"keyboard pants," misspellings of the
word "scorpion."  And they're getting a free product whose quality is,
I guess, more or less okay for them.  Because they keep showing up.

*Yet my photos aren't any good, as photos.  They're just snapshots
with a pocket cam; they're never well lit, they're rarely
well-composed.  Mostly they're visual writerly notes, they're triggers
for personal memory, stuff I can go back later and go "oh yeah" about. 

*That's presumably why I keep doing it.  I don't derive any particular
benefit from being a not-very-good Internet photographer.  I get a
certain amount of egoboost out of it, I guess, but there's also
something vaguely humiliating about being a "photographer" whose most
famous work ever is a can of Mickey Mouse Croatian Liver Paste.

*I think the real reason I do it is to watch this visual aspect of the
Internet mutating.  Photos and the Internet have been changing
violently, in ways that conjure up powerful ideas like "drive toward
free" and "cult of the amateur." I watched analog photography die, and
it could be that pretty soon I'm gonna have to watch FlickR and Yahoo!
die, too.  

*And then my thriving FlickR set is gonna have the melancholy grandeur
of an album full of rapidly fading Polaroids, only much, much more so.
FlickR was the ur-Web 2.0 social network, and it was brilliantly
designed, but then, so was the analog Brownie.

 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #6 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 01:59

    
*It makes me think of the melancholy tale of Kodak, who knew from the
get-go than digital photos would replace analog technology -- but they
missed the transitional boat there, BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T BEAR TO
CREATE BAD CAMERAS.  They were elite American optical engineers and
they couldn't bring themselves to debase the product.

*That's not some kind of quirk.  Look at this scary thing about the
Japanese here.  "Digital age leaves myopic Japan facing manufacturing
crisis." 

http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20110101f1.html

*Basically the argument here is that they refuse to use crap
components, and they're sticking to high-end developed-world glossy
consumer tech, so they can't get any traction... with the Brazilians.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #7 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 04:56

    
*Here's ex-President Lula on a hospital charity call, showing up in
some teenage kid's excited lousy Internet snapshot.

http://noticias.r7.com/brasil/noticias/ex-presidente-lula-aceita-pedido-e-tira
-foto-com-criancas-em-hospital-20110101.html

*What do you think went through his head:  "well, I'm ex-president, I
guess I'll be in some teenage kid's socially-mediated scrapbook now?"

*And if you think that's something, check out the checkered career of
Twitter's own "KermlinRussia," the Fake Medvedev.

http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2011/01/02/meet_the_persident?page=full
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #8 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 11 05:28

    
That Lula piece says he "could not resist and accepted the request of
a group of children to take a picture." Couldn't resist, I suppose,
because he's a real man of the people, the rare charismatic leader with
deep social intelligence, who connects with everybody, even (or
especially) a tribe of kids in a hospital. It's inspiring to see a guy
like that in action. The Kremlin could use a Lula about now, I suspect.
Maybe Lula could embark on a coaching career, with Mark Zuckerberg,
Julian Assange, Dmitriy Medvedev and John Boehner as his first clients.
And he should probably start with Yusuf Raza Gilani:
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/04/world/asia/04pakistan.html?_r=1&src=twrh
p
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #9 of 156: Ted Newcomb (nukem777) (tcn) Mon 3 Jan 11 08:46

    
Always nice to start the year off with your points of view. These are
all good examples of how this may well be the year social media pushes
back in it's effect on global culture. As we understand and
misunderstand each other what will be some of the issues involved in
our learning curve?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #10 of 156: la brujaja (zorca) Mon 3 Jan 11 11:39

    
love following your flickr photos. love flickr. it's like getting to watch
the world through other people's eyes. plus, as you point out, it's a great
way to build out our own personal memory banks. on a recent trip to san
francisco's mission, my home for 25 years, i stumbled on an alley that has
recently exploded with art worthy of any museum. combing through the set now
is almost as good as being there again.
http://www.flickr.com/photos/zorca/sets/72157625275597801/

so but i guess the question i keep asking myself is the same one i've been
asking for years. there are gems scattered all over the internet. what are
the discovery mechanisms that you see emerging for those of us outside the
mainstream flow? twitter and my newsreader are my best friends these days
(though frustrated by the lack of a feed for the wired/beyond blog?). guess
i'm still hoping for true collaborative filtering that could cull my own odd
tastes, match me up against the larger world, and and then build me a custom
feed that goes beyond what i'm already finding.

all typed out this feels a little churlish. i feel lucky to be exposed to so
much already. but do feel that we have a ways to go in finding the right
solutions to filtering and recommendations.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #11 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 3 Jan 11 12:23

    
<10> Ditto. When do we get our robots to keep up with all the info
overload?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #12 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 11 13:30

    
Via the Facebook events page for this talk, Phil Wolff posted:

"Humanity is under stress by large forces, (insert your list here).
Have you observed institutions adapting meaningfully? New ones emerging
to respond? "

(Kieran O'Neill commented on Phil's post: "The resurgence of bicycles?
City and town councils across the developed world are gradually
responding to this, with many setting targets like 10% of all journeys
being made by bike. Gradual response to shrinking oil supplies?")
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #13 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 11 13:57

    
Ted Newcomb has suggested #sotw2011 as the hashtag for this
conversation. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #14 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 11 16:42

    
Here's another one, posted by Ian Cooper on Facebook:

"This year has seen the web challenge the US's commitment to freedom
of speech on the Internet via Wikileaks, seen questions asked about net
neutrality, and seen more and more institutions realize that the
discourse practiced there is beyond their control. What do you think
the reaction of governments and institutions will be to that? Are there
historical parallels, such as vernacular versions of the Bible, or
Caxton and his printing press to draw from?"
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #15 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 11 16:52

    
Hard to generalize about the reaction of governments and institutions.
Those are just abstractions, after all. I suppose there is a
groupthink, a sense that the people who comprise the governments and
institutions surrender their will and identity to the concepts and
principles that shape and inform those - not sure what to call 'em,
transpersonal entities?  In the case of Wikileaks, the responses seemed
to come from a personal level of embarrassment, not so much a matter
of principle. And for that matter, are the principles clear?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #16 of 156: gmoke (gmokecamb) Mon 3 Jan 11 18:19

    
One thing I see on the horizon and which I think will be the next step
for 350.org is a kind of ongoing global brainstorm on local, practical
solutions and adaptations to climate change.  Since the international
diplomats aren't going to do anything until 2020 and the incoming US
Congress refuses to do anything constructive, those who want to address
climate change will have to do it themselves.  Online repositories of
information where people can share what works where and what doesn't
will help speed our climbing the collective learning curve and the
replication of successful experiments.

There are some groups online which are trying to pull together parts
of this puzzle but no central nexus that I know of.  Yet.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #17 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 23:36

    
*Wow, we've got a conversation with a #hashtag.  How 2011.

*In terms of following stuff, I like search engines, pundits, and
serendipity.  I'm trending toward pundits, because the search engines
are getting maxed-out by search-engine optimization.

*For instance, here's Tim O'Reilly, Mr Web 2.0, turning me on to the
increasing uselessness of Google.

"timoreilly Tim O'Reilly 
"On the increasing uselessness of Google http://bit.ly/dQuCg7 I agree.
Even the google alerts I set are almost all turning up spam."

*I might have felt just some vague sense of discontent without
realizing that the Google sourcewaters have been polluted there.

*There was a halcyon period there where people seemed lost in the info
overload and the search machines were full of limpid lucidity.  But we
may be approaching a period where the machines will feed you an
infinite amount of cunningly-engineered gibberish and you have to climb
to the mountaintop and talk to some human greybeard in order to have
any idea what's going on.

*I think it's great to follow obscure national leaders.  I used to
think these people were well-informed.  After all, they've got, like,
intelligence bureau briefings every morning, and stuff...  Now I
realize that they mostly cut ribbons and go to summits.  Librarians in
small Midwestern towns
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #18 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 11 23:51

    
...as I was saying, librarians in small Midwestern towns are better
informed than these national-leader guys.

*These WELL commands are touchy today. With a sore thumb and a wonky
touchpad, this is like riding a bronco.

*A lot of the stuff that most interests me is of niche interest. I
mean, like, ludicrously niche interest.  For instance, if you're into
3d-printed couture shoes, you're just not gonna do much better than
Fabbaloo.

"fabbaloo Fabbaloo 
3D Printed Couture Shoes http://goo.gl/fb/jhtUV #3dprinting "

*It's not like Fabbaloo is the world's greatest journalist or
anything, but the Venn Diagram of couture shoes +plus+ fabbing is so
tiny that Fabbaloo is all over it.

*I used to have a lot of hope in crowdsourced collective intelligence,
but I've come to realize that these networked wisdom-of-crowds
entities are not very bright... they're about as "smart" as, say, the
helpful and publicly-minded Rotary Club.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #19 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 4 Jan 11 00:12

    
*As for the US Congress... well, there was a time when there would be
a "Congressional investigation" and there was some likelihood that the
Congress, as a knowledge-seeking body full of smart, rich lawyers with
subpoena powers, would discover some objective facts about public
reality that people didn't already know.

*With the present Congress, I don't see how that's possible.  Why
would objective facts trouble these zealots in any way, and if they
knew the truth, what would they do with it?  About all they can do is
move the mental frameworks of Christian Fundamentalism off the Bible
and onto the US Constitution.  

*And that's why I like to follow SarahPalinUSA on Twitter.  Because,
although the US Congress is incapable of rational thought, at least
they've got their female Delphic oracle.  

"HeyTammyBruce Tammy Bruce retweeted by SarahPalinUSA
But this hypocrisy is just truly too much. Enuf already--the more
someone complains about the homos the more we should look under their
bed"

*So, I'd be guessing they're gonna ease up on the gaybashing this
season to please ol' Sarah, and then... but what?  Perform some
crystal-ball skrying on the Federal Reserve and the Trilateral
Commission, I guess.... 

The US Right are non compos mentis now.  It's like watching Nixon's
Silent Majority finally discovering LSD.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #20 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 4 Jan 11 02:29

    
*Julian Bleecker is the guy who wrote the first Design Fiction
manifesto, so he is pretty much Dr. Design-Fiction.  Here he describes
what he's been up to lately.

http://www.nearfuturelaboratory.com/2011/01/03/a-few-things-the-laboratory-did
-in-2010/

*This SXSW Interactive panel he mentions, which featured Julian
Bleecker,  Stuart Candy, Sascha Pohflepp, Jake Dunagan, with Jennifer
Leonard ably moderating, was the ground zero of Design Fiction.
A great collation of overlapping ideas and creative approaches by
people who really wanna do it.  

*The audio recording of this panel:


http://audio.sxsw.com/2010/podcasts/031310i_designFiction.mp3

*The odd thing about my own relation to design fiction is that, unlike
Pohflepp, Bleecker, Candy and Dunagan, I scarcely do any of it. 
Because I'm just not a designer.  Sometimes I teach design fiction, and
watch my design students try it out.  And I collate it on my blog. 
But I don't do much of it myself.

*Sometimes I write science fiction with a heavy design emphasis, but I
wouldn't formally call that "Design Fiction."  Design Fiction is very
contemporary and tends to mix speculative objects, "diegetic
prototypes," mockups, group activities, futurist scenarios, drawings,
animations, videos, interactions, and vaguely political "critical
design" put-ons.  Design Fiction has never been a linear, narrative,
literary effort at fiction.  

*The role of writing in design-fiction is pretty much like
tech-writing for other kinds of industrial-design efforts.  It's
supportive rather than central.

*The gray eminences of design-fiction are undoubtedly Tony Dunne and
Fiona Raby of the Royal College of Art.  They never write fiction. They
write books, teach, and do installations.

"Dunne & Raby use design as a medium to stimulate discussion and
debate amongst designers, industry and the public about the social,
cultural and ethical implications of current and emerging
technologies."  And boy, do they ever.
 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #21 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 11 05:29

    
A Dunne & Raby quote that fires me up:

"Design can only follow our needs and desires, it can't create them.
If our desires remain unimaginative and practical, then that is what
design will be. In this project we are hoping for a time when we will
have more complex and subtle everyday needs than we do today. These
objects are designed in anticipation of that time. Patiently waiting.
Maybe they are utopian."
http://www.dunneandraby.co.uk/content/projects/75/0

I do wish they had said "Maybe they are Plutopian."
(http://plutopia.org - shameless plug)

Your point with the Viridian Design movement, that the best way to
rewire culture and thought is by hacking design, made great sense, and
Viridian succeeded in drawing designers and futurists to the problem of
global warming and accelerating global awareness of the potential
problem, but it was hard to imagine the backlash. Global warming's
become an aspect of a greater culture war, supposedly "conservative" vs
"liberal," but I think it's less ideological than that, less
conceptual, more emotional. I've talked to people who know nothing
about climate science, but they have something to say about global
warming, and it's not intellectual dispute. They just hate it. They
hate the idea because they associate it with a loss of freedom. They
don't want anybody to tell them that they can't spew carbon into the
atmosphere... they're weary of constraints dictated by experts,
professionals, governments... seat belts, emission controls, smoking
areas, mandatory vaccinations, food inspections... lately in the U.S.,
mandatory health insurance... 

Saturday at a party in rural Travis County, Texas, I met a garrulous
man who railed against the nanny state and the socialist revolution in
America, and warned me that he and others like him are buying guns and
hoarding ammunition. There's going to be a revolt, he said. It's not a
matter of whether, just when. He was pleasant, friendly, and
acknowledged at one point that he probably sounded a little crazy. But
he was serious.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #22 of 156: E (wickett) Tue 4 Jan 11 06:04

    <scribbled by wickett Tue 4 Jan 11 06:05>
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #23 of 156: . (wickett) Tue 4 Jan 11 06:08

    

 Liberals and progressives were thrilled and vocal when Barack Obama became
 our first black president.  They/we have been largely incoherent (or 
 silent) about the relationship between race and the subsequent rise of 
 vigilante political revolution/terrorism against governmental oversight.

 Why can we not name the likely connection between the race of our president
 and the rising mass rejection of government?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #24 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 4 Jan 11 09:05

    
<21> Jon, I heard the same thing from Bakersfield, Ca. Think the
heartland is just fed up by what they do and don't understand is going
on during the "chaotic disruption" of this technological and global
transition we are all experiencing. Kind of scary though. And the
militias have been all too quiet for all too long. 

<23> Think it's coincidental not racial. A lot of confluences re:
above.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #25 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 4 Jan 11 09:06

    
I've never really gotten the Design thing until now. Thanks for all
those links.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #26 of 156: Matthew McClure (mmc) Tue 4 Jan 11 12:47

    
Two things I thought were notable in 2010 were the passing of Chambers
Johnson (*Blowback*, *The Sorrows of Empire*, *Nemesis*) and the
meeting in Cancún.

Johnson was very good at tracing - and decrying - the increasing
militarism and imperialism of the USA. I think his passing leaves an
empty niche that I hope gets filled.

Cancún didn't produce much in terms of specifics but did illustrate
that leadership on world-changing matters like climate change is more
likely to come from people like Mexico's Felipe de Jesus Calderon
Hinojosa than from Barack Obama.

Pursuant to George's <16>, Bill McKibben had a very eloquent argument
in *Mother Jones*:

"If we let this planet warm much longer, scientists tell us that we'll
lose forever the chance of getting back to 350. That means we'll lose
forever the basic architecture of our planet with its frozen poles.
Already the ocean is turning steadily more acidic; already the
atmosphere is growing steadily wetter, which means desertifying
evaporation in arid areas and downpour and deluge elsewhere."
(http://bit.ly/gWh9XJ)

Happy New Year!
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #27 of 156: Matthew McClure (mmc) Tue 4 Jan 11 13:17

    
Oops, meant Chalmers Johnson, not Chambers, in <26>. More of a mindo
than a typo.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #28 of 156: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 4 Jan 11 13:50

    
I know the feeling. Fat-synapsed it. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #29 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 11 15:25

    
Here's a Chalmers Johnson quote:

"In Blowback, I set out to explain why we are hated around the world.
The concept "blowback" does not just mean retaliation for things our
government has done to and in foreign countries. It refers to
retaliation for the numerous illegal operations we have carried out
abroad that were kept totally secret from the American public. This
means that when the retaliation comes -- as it did so spectacularly on
September 11, 2001 -- the American public is unable to put the events
in context. So they tend to support acts intended to lash out against
the perpetrators, thereby most commonly preparing the ground for yet
another cycle of blowback."

Hearing something like that from someone of his background reminds me
how woefully ignorant we inherently must be of the state of the world
we're here to discuss. Journalism is deceptive - you get facts, but no
truth.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #30 of 156: la brujaja (zorca) Tue 4 Jan 11 18:57

    
with all this talk in america of founders' intentions, i've been going back
and rereading a bit. it's bracing/terrifying to read james madison, for
instance:

"If tyranny and oppression come to this land, it will be in the guise of
fighting a foreign enemy."

we must look so foolish (and pompous) to those abroad. any advice for those
of us still clinging to the hope that democracy can be reignited here?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #31 of 156: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Tue 4 Jan 11 20:09

    
From off-WELL reader karger@mit.edu:

You mentioned the need for people to address climate change
themselves.  An interesting effort for that is underway at
<http://climatecolab.org/>

Question: while information is now easily accessible, people still
show an amazing tendency to believe things that said information shows
to be false (cf. climate change).  Is there any hope that this will
change?  Will the web evolve into an instrument that causes people to
become better informed?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #32 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 11 01:43

    
In the intro to this talk, we say this is the 11th annual State of the
World talk, but there was a 12th, in January 2000, called "Bruce
Sterling: A Viridian Future." (Just wanted to correct the record - we
had two different numbers in the air.)

Also a reminder that anyone can send a comment or question for this
discussion to inkwell at well.com, and a host of the Inkwell conference
will post it here.

Finally, note that Bruce in in Belgrade, several hours ahead of the
U.S., ostensibly sleeping while the rest of us are posting.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #33 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 11 02:05

    
Quick insomniac response to karger at mit.edu, above:

You ask if the web will evolve into an instrument that keeps people
better informed, and I refer you to my post above where I say
"Journalism is deceptive - you get facts, but no truth." While that may
have been an overstatement, it's relevant to your question. With the
web we have an explosion of information, more and more "facts"
delivered to more and more people, but a glut of information can
obscure the truth, rather than reveal it. Access to information isn't
the same as access to understanding, to wisdom. People can be on fire
with bad facts, or misguided interpretations of facts. A robust
information environment invites robust propaganda techniques. At the
same time we see Internet adoption increasing, we see increased
political polarization, due in part to astroturf engines spewing
political lies and disinformation.

To your specific point, industries that could be adversely impacted by
viable responses to anthropogenic climate change, and others who see
climate change as a liberal plot to bring more regulation to "free"
markets, are forcefully spreading doubt that climate change is related
to human activity, or that climate change is even happening (harder to
argue when polar ice caps are melting and weather effects are
increasingly evident). The issue's heavily politicized and
propagandized, and I would argue that it's easier to mislead within
today's robust, complex information environment than it might have been
in a simpler and more limited information environment with channels
dominated by a few real experts and a more constrained debate.  We need
a whole new kind of literacy to extract real understanding from the
complex 21st century media matrix. (I'm looking forward to the book
Howard Rheingold's writing on the subject of digital literacy.)
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #34 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 11 06:17

    
From John Ohno, via Facebook: "The focus appears to be on physical
technologies that help with increasing the signal to noise ratio by
filtering out the noise, but historically, that has been the job of
social technologies (by which I mean things like money, government, and
table manners). Perhaps social technologies could be leveraged in the
context of avoiding the kinds of problems that we are getting with the
pollution of google alert results, etc., especially if our social tech
is not then standardized and reimplemented in the form of a physical
technology (like twitter's 'retweet' becoming a button -- a monoculture
is much easier to subvert, and physical tech tends to be both less
mutable and more likely to be made universal than equivalent social
tech)."
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #35 of 156: Man proposes. Man (God?)disposes (robertflink) Wed 5 Jan 11 07:15

    
The forgoing prompted some questions I can't resist.

How do we increase diversity, freedom, opportunity, etc while
developing the never-before-existing common perceptions and cooperative
actions on a world scale over long periods of time that seems to be
required to address global problems of concern?  

I fail to see how a system truly capable of addressing these global
problems would be run well by creatures that have been historically
shown to be susceptible to the seductions of power.  

Is virtual omnipotence sobering for humans?  Even gods seem to have
had trouble here.

Is the cure much worse than the disease?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #36 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 11 08:05

    
We can take some comfort in discussing the State of the World, rather
than the state of the USA.

Back in the 90s, when I was travelling in Europe, I used to get a lot
of  eager queries about the USA.  What's new over there, what are you
doing with your lives and your riches and your technology, why is your
government like that?    This was considered a matter of urgency, and
most Europeans I met, who were naturally from techie, artsy and
literary circles, held views of America that were surprisingly like
contemporary paranoid  Tea Party views.  They had interestingly wacky
private theologies about the Pentagon, the CIA, Wall Street, the
malignant military-industrial complex and so forth...  Not that they
ever bothered to find out much about the factual operation of these
bodies.  Stilll,  they were sure that the USA really mattered.

Nowadays, the Europeans are just not all that concerned about Yankees.
 They don't ask; they're incurious about America, they are blase'. 
Being an American in Europe now is rather like being a Canadian, and
it's trending toward being a Brazilian.  

Americans are much rarer in Europe,  due to the cost of the euro.  
Wikileaks or no Wikileaks, there's no sense that that USA has any
particular agency in Europe or the world, other than the usual oil and
Moslems.  There's no global American agenda that matters to anyone
much.  Civil rights?  Free expression?  "Winds of freedom and
democracy?"  Aw come on!

People in Europe were extremely scared when the USA invaded Iraq, but
now that the paper tiger is stuck there, they no longer fret much. 
People in the USA are certainly upset about the visible decline of the
USA, but if you look at the US from a European perspective, the USA
isn't doing anything very alarming or even interesting.  It's a big
country, yes, but it's a peaceful, stagnant, slothful country. 

 There are no riots or violent street marches in America.  There
aren't any assassinations, which America used to be so famous for. 
Militias are nonexistent.  There are no coups brewing.  

There's zero in the way to effective dissidence about the American
ultrarich and the moguls in the banking system.   The American Left is
completely enfeebled and without one creative idea in its head, and the
American Right is delusionary; it's not a violent, nationalist, scary
right-wing, it's a bunch of fat southern guys listening to Glenn Beck
and denying evolution.  

The US is broke.   So they can't buy anything from people; they're not
selling anything that people want, except for guns and iPhones. 
There's just not a lot of reasons for foreigners to exercise any
hostility against the US, or even care what the beached whale is doing
one way or the other.

American soft power is vanishing.  Foreigners are much less interested
in American television,  movies, pop music...    America once had a
tremendous hammerlock on those expensive channels of distribution, but
those old analog megaphones don't matter  half as much in today's
network society.    

The USA has become a big banana republic; in other words,  it's come
to behave like other countries quite normally behave.  The upside is
that we don't get blamed for what happens; the downside is, nothing
much happens. Decay and denial. Gothic High Tech.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #37 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 11 08:05

    
With that said about the USA, I kind of worry about the Europeans.  I
know them better now than I used to, and the bloom is off the rose
there for me.  One always knew, as an American, that you were in old
societies, but the gaudy tumult at the end of the Cold War disguised
that.  

     Now the Europeans really do seem to be acting old -- not
delusionary and bewildered, like the USA, but elderly, crotchety.  Bent
over their knitting.
 

      Without Americans and Soviets around to boss and screech at
them, the Europeans are obsessed with immigration and internal
minorities.  It's all about the lazy, job-stealing Polish plumber or
the North African guy next door who killed a goat in his bathtub....  

 Obviously immigration is a big deal for small, relatively homogenous
societies with big language and heritage issues.  But something about
this pervasive anxiety  really makes contemporary Europeans seem feeble
and small-minded.    These used to be massive, globe-spanning,
imperial states.  Even in the Cold War, they were at least the major
pieces on the planetary chessboard.  Now you can ask what the glorious
European Project is about, and it's  mostly about a cushy retirement
for what's left of their managerial class.  Europe's younger generation
is getting one of the rawest deals you can imagine.  

Then there's Brazil.  Oh boy!
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #38 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 11 08:06

    

People in the discussion here have been fretting about violence. 
Brazil is incredibly violent.  Murder rates are sky high.  The most
popular movie in the country is a gritty cop shoot-'em called "Elite
Troop" which is all about green-beret types fighting the drug gangsters
in major Brazilian cities.  It like a drug-fueled class war or a
class-fueled drug war, take your pick.  The violence is on television
all the time too, in bars, hotel lobbies, it's a Vietnam level of
rat-a-tat-tat.

Obviously this drug violence is not going to go away in Brazil. 
They're not going to beat it with helicopters and Iraq-style house
raids.  The demand for the drugs isn't going away, and the favelas have
an infinite supply of young outcastes.  

    There's also kidnapping and burglary as thriving enterprises.  But
if one asks if Brazil matters these days, if its trade is expanding,
its influence rising, if is government  is nationally or
internationally effective, the level of violence in Brazil scarcely
comes up as an issue.

      Obviously the violence matters plenty if you yourself get shot
or mugged or robbed, but in geopolitical terms, it's just not very much
of a problem.  Even as a problem, it's a puzzling business.  

I went into a favela in Sao Paulo, because I had some friends who knew
a guy there who was a kind of left-wing crime writer type.  This was
an exceedingly interesting visit, and I naturally imagined, "wow, we're
heading for a genuine favela,  this is gonna be a menacing journey
full of crack-fueled tough guys.  Then we moseyed into the favela and
it was basically a nursery.  It was full of little kids.  

      Our writer friend showed us a kindergarten he was sponsoring. 
It was impossible to come across all Mickey Spillane when you were
being followed around, by dewy-eyed curious four-year-olds.  They were
born there.  They lived there.

     Our host had two major beefs about his native favela, (a), the
drugs, which he doesn't consume and (b) police death squads showing up
in plainclothes packs and icing any teenage male on a motorbike. 
Because having enough cash to own a motorbike is prima facie evidence
of favela drug money.  Also, tough kids on bikes with pistols can zoom
over toward the police station and return fire.  Obviously that won't
do.
   
       I believed him.  I'm quite sure he was telling the truth.  The
favela is in the grip of the dope trade and summary executions.  It's a
fact, but as far as me myself being in the favela, obviously the
locals could give a damn.  They didn't care.  They couldn't have been
more politely indifferent.   They're not some kind of supernatural
ultramenace from Mars, they're big-city poor people in improvised
housing.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #39 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 11 08:07

    

      Later, in Brasilia, the wife and I were idly  strolling down the
major boulevard when some female bureaucrat made us as tourists.  She
busybodied on up to us and in excellent English, she urged us to get
off the streets and hide our shoulder bags.  Because we might get
robbed.  

    Robbed, in broad daylight, in the streets of the capital of
Brazil.  We were two strolling pedestrians in a colossal empty
street... More like an endless plaza, really, a kind of Brazilian Tian
An Men...  And the question is, you know, robbed by WHOM?  Robbed HOW? 
There wasn't a soul around.   Just us.  And her, trying to clue us in
about the crime terror.

    I could envision getting robbed at the local bus station, which
was maybe four colossal blocks away, because if you're a thief, you can
grab the bag, hand it to a confederate, jump on two buses and split
the loot later...  but nobody walks across vast areas of empty space
and sticks up a foreigner.  That's just not practical.  That's not how
crime works.

     "There's nobody here to help us," my wife observed, gazing around
us at the urban abyss all spooked,  but how was it even possible to be
afraid of  nobody?  There was no threat.   

      So, basically, it was the two of us who were the issue-- two
people talking English and rubbernecking.  Rulebreakers.   This
apparatchik woman was trying to chide us into a taxi, so we would stay
out of trouble.   We ourselves were the trouble: in much the way that a
dorky guy who fails to take off his shoes in the airport terrorspace
is a menace to propriety.   

       In reality, nobody was going to hurt us.   We were stout and
sober and fresh from Belgrade.  We could probably curb-stomp most
Brasilia purse-snatchers, unless they knew capoeira.  

         I still wonder about it.  

       Just suppose, for some reason, that Al Qaeda had hijacked three
Brazilian airplanes and attacked the tallest buildings in Sao Paulo
and the defense ministry in Brasilia.  That would have been shocking,
and everyone would have expressed regret and anger and sent blood
donations, and by now everyone would have forgotten all about it.  It
would have been a freakish oddity, and by now Brazil would be just
fine, as Brazilian as ever, and no more daunted by that incident than a
rubber sandal by a pebble.  "Violence."  Yeah, right.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #40 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 5 Jan 11 09:29

    
How do you see the global shift in power and development - the
BRICI's(Brazil, Russia, India, China and Indonesia)? We've been talking
about Robert Kaplan's Monsoon and Ian Morris' Why The West Rules - For
Now here on the WELL. They both seem to think the new Great Game is
the Indian Ocean region, from East Africa to Malaysia and Java and
argue that it's not a question of if, but when - varying from 2050 to
2100. Are time and tech going to speed things up so quickly as to make
that kind of global power shift?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #41 of 156: KUMBAYISTA! (smendler) Wed 5 Jan 11 11:44

    
>>This apparatchik woman was trying to chide us into a taxi, so we
would stay out of trouble.

Maybe the trouble was waiting inside the taxi... (2010 was the year
Brunner used for STAND ON ZANZIBAR, right? With its pseudo-cabs?) I
might think this is emblematic of something: the folks "warning you of
danger" may have nefarious intent themselves. How do you know whom to
trust?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #42 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 11 13:12

    
I gave a talk about the history and future of the Internet at a local
coworking facility today, and I was thinking how serene and attentive
everyone seemed. No sense of angst in the room. A bunch of freelancers
eager to learn more about the network that's become a foundation for
their way of life. We take the network for granted, like indoor
plumbing, running water, and central air.

The future of the Internet isn't science fiction, in fact it's rather
mundane. "Augmented reality" sounds sexy, and it's useful, but it's
really nuts and bolts and geocodes. Almost boring to think about. All
the standards and patterns for life online are pretty well established;
I'm having trouble thinking what would knock my socks off at this
point. 

A couple of weeks ago I saw The Eggmen, a Beatles cover band here in
Austin, perform "I Am the Walrus" with strings, every note in place,
and I thought how much of life is like being in a cover band, trying to
hit the right notes, make that perfect replication of what went
before. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #43 of 156: david gault (dgault) Wed 5 Jan 11 13:18

    

>make that perfect replication of what went
 before.

In my little neck of the internet woods, we automate to achieve 
that goal.   
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #44 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 5 Jan 11 14:39

    
Sylvia is knocking my socks off at the moment...an AI personal digital
assistant. I love it. Should be ready for public release
soon...http://vimeo.com/4234956
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #45 of 156: Gene Gallagher (gallaghergene) Wed 5 Jan 11 15:38

    
I guess this is no news or old news, but I must chime in with a couple
of commentary bits:

-guy in CA tells me that he notices a real shortage of ammo at gun
shows recently.

-Bakersfield, where even real Mexicans speak English with Oakie
accents, has a sizable, prosperous and enterprising Sikh population
that includes some American converts.

Am I off-subject? I don't know.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #46 of 156: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Wed 5 Jan 11 17:16

    
More from off-WELL reader karger@mit.edu:

Jon, I agree with your point about the need for a new information 
literacy.  But there's a big challenge for this kind of literacy: 
apparently, people don't want it.  There's plenty of evidence that 
people use the Web selectively to confirm their prejudices rather than
seek the truth.
<http://www.suite101.com/content/we-are-all-biased-mental-filters-a325376>
<http://social.cs.uiuc.edu/papers/pdfs/hicss09-echo-gilbert.pdf>
   Traditionally, those who were illiterate may have been too 
embarrassed to admit it, but the benefits of literacy were widely 
recognized.  It doesn't look like that's the case for this new 
literacy.  If people don't care, can the right skills ever spread?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #47 of 156: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Wed 5 Jan 11 17:17

    
And from justin.pickard@gmail.com:

It's been a tough year for the Europe, a continent haunted by the
spectre of defaulting PIGS. With Bruce in Belgrade, and Serbia poised
to join the EU in the next 3-4 years, I find myself wondering what it's
like looking in from the outside. Europe was the future once: a
low-key future of soft power, cities of culture, and Large Hadron
Colliders. In 2008, Bruce said there were days he found himself
thinking that "the EU is more likely to become Google than it is to
become a state." Does this still stand?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #48 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 11 19:32

    
Responding to David Karger: Good point re resistance to digital
literacy; my thought is that we have to teach it K-12, and it'll take
time. And we have to define digital literacy before we teach it - I'm
hoping Howard's book will be part of that solution. 

Seth Mnookin, author of "The Panic Virus," speaking on CNN, just
pointed out that there are still people who believe the world is flat. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #49 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 02:35

    
"The Sikhs of Bakersfield."  Wasn't that a really cool Dwight Yoakam
song?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #50 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 03:06

    
Things haven't been looking great for the EU as a 'state.'  It's not
Google, either.  Despite its elected parliament, it's more a protocol
than a state.  You obey the EU standards and they make you look
European, and if you do that long enough, then they let you play.  But
the game as a whole isn't evolving much.

It became a really big deal here in Belgrade when the Schengen travel
barrier dropped for Serbia.  It felt like a matter of hours before this
crooked corner of the Balkans stopped being a cyberpunk dystopia and
turned into a paranormal romance.  

A lot of European investors showed up -- not enough to avert a minor
downturn, but some did come, and with money -- and it was startling to
see a Serbian re-branding charm offensive breaking out at the airport
and the major hotels.  Suddenly Serbia, this notorious cockpit of
ethnic mayhem, was all about rosy-cheeked madchens in hand-knitted
aprons out in the blooming apple orchards.  Serbia was even an
eco-resort.

Serbian media, which used to be noted for its virulent
party-controlled tabloids and its edgy, hardcore-alternative
dissidence, really isn't about much of anything now.  It's about tennis
stars and water polo and celebrity couples.  This week I saw Marina
Abramovic, globally notorious Serbian nutcase self-scarring performance
artist, wearing lipstick and a pretty hat on the cover of ELLE.  Yeah,
the bourgeois, ladylike Marina Abramovic!  Man, if they can calm ol'
Marina down, anything's possible.

In short, Serbia's becoming a European backwater instead of a hideout
for crazed refuseniks.

The other big change here is the growing Russian influence.  The
Russians had cash and the Serbs sold off a lot of infrastructure to
them; the Russian alliance is the ace in the hole in case Europe gets
all obstreperous.  

There's also a growing Turkish influence.  Serbs hate Turks and
vice-versa, but there's some kind of tacit alliance there between
former-Ottoman powers that are on the fringe of Europe and not allowed
in it.

It's been ten years since the war.  That's a pretty good long time,
even by Balkan standards.  People are aces here at nourishing
resentments, but nowadays they seem more worried about 1389 than 1999. 
Serbia is no longer a tortured, crooked, postwar province of a wrecked
country... it's becoming just a weird little country with a dark but
receding past.

I never thought it would be relaxing to come here, but now I have a
quieter new apartment in a rather more leafy and spacious part of the
city, and, you know, it IS relaxing.  
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #51 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 03:22

    
*I guess I should get all worried about the gun shows and the ammo
shortage anecdote... But that's what the US offers the world.  Guns and
ammo.  The US spends more on military gear than everybody else put
together.  The US is spending Chinese credit on military gear.  

*It doesn't seem too surprising that a nation with these habits should
be really into the produce.  It's like the Swiss and clocks, or the
French and cheese. 

*There aren't any tough, armed, right-wing militias in the US shoving
people off the sidewalk.  The US doesn't even have soccer hooligans.
The Tea Party is amazingly nonviolent, even by American political
standards.  They don't occupy buildings, they don't get teargassed,
they don't burn churches or car-bomb the opposition party.  

*Their spiritual leader is this daffy Aimee Semple McPherson creature
from Alaska -- she's not some kind of jackbooted Mussolini.  The Tea
Party is not remotely scary.  Bonkers, yeah; physically intimidating,
no way.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #52 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 03:36

    
*The Brazilians are buying a lot of guns.  They're seriously beefing
up the Navy and the Air Force.  This Brazilian pugnacity is kinda
overlooked by leftie fans who admire their green and working-class
sentiments.

*The Chinese are also boosting their Navy quite a lot, but the Chinese
are in a tough neighborhood.  It's a little unclear to me who the
Brazilian Air Force is supposed to blow up.  Their worst security
problems are in the jungles and inside their own cities.  They've got
zilch to do with Mach 4 dogfights.  I confess myself a little puzzled
by this.

*It may be that they're buying this stuff just to boost their own arms
industry.  Because they do make arms -- especially cute little urban
tanks / armored cars -- and yeah, they sell plenty of 'em.  Weird
warthog-like armored cash-cars have a heavy presence in the streets of
Sao Paulo; they seem as common as fireplugs.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #53 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 11 04:33

    
Two big shows in the U.S.: Congress is in session, and the 2011
Consumer Electronics Show is under way. It's debatable which of these
two should or will get the most attention. Congress is full of Tea
Party newbies all full of worldchanging piss and vinegar, convinced
that they can fix government by pruning budgets and programs, not quite
realizing yet how constrained is their power, and that the grand old
party they're in bed with drinks 'way too much, and wets the bed every
night. 

Meanwhile CES opened with a speech by Microsoft's Steve Ballmer, who
was focused on selling "interactive entertainment," what we used to
call games, via Xbox 360, Xbox Live, and Kinect, which "have made 2010
the best in our history." Ron Forbes followed, addressing the pressing
questions du jour, like "when is Xbox gonna support Netflix and Hulu
Plus?" Netflix is offering unlimited streaming movies and television
shows at $7.99 per month, diverting the mass audience from broadcast
and cable television to a commercial-free environment where you can
stream content 24/7 on demand. You can potentially be wired to content
and games every minute of the day, insulated from the world at large,
without thinking a single unique thought of your own. Welcome home,
Neo.

On the other hand, many are also wired to partisan news channels,
drive-by conversations on TWitter and Facebook, short form digital
video from YouTube et al.  There's a f2f social culture evolving, too -
meetups, events, and parties coordinated online, feeling like crowds
though often only 30-40 people here and there. Freelancers who
otherwise have nothing in common share coworking spaces where
everybody's some variation of web developer or social marketing maven.
Elsewhere in academic and incubation environments entrepeneurs are
scratching their niches, looking for new ideas, new games, new forms of
media, new ways to source and package energy... something that will
sell in a world where pockets once heavy with coin are feeling drained.


It's all so fragmented.

The monkeys in our heads are rattled, they're bouncing and swinging
out of control. Streams of thought block awareness of the moment. We're
somnambulists in a world of persistent dreams that are not necessarily
our own. The voices in our heads are not inherently our own, and not
inherently friendly. And there are so many of them.

This is timely: "There is a growing mountain of research. But there is
increased evidence that we are being bogged down today as
specialization extends. The investigator is staggered by the findings
and conclusions of thousands of other workers—conclusions that he
cannot find time to grasp, much less to remember, as they appear. Yet
specialization becomes increasingly necessary for progress, and the
effort to bridge between disciplines is correspondingly superficial."

Oh, wait - that was Vannevar Bush in 1945.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #54 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 11 04:40

    
"If a man reasons and thinks soundly, no matter what path he follows
in solving these problems, he must inevitably arrive back at himself,
and begin with the problem of what he is himself and what his place is
in the world around him." - George Ivanovitch Gurdjieff

"You are perfect as you are, and you could use a little work." -
Shunryu Suzuki-Roshi
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #55 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 11 04:54

    
Two comments from Julian Bond, via Facebook:

Bruce: "We can take some comfort in discussing the State of the World,
rather than the state of the USA." Well said. This is something that
bothers me every year when the discussion starts global but frequently
ends up being about the USA. Given that it's an American (living in
Belgrade) talking to an American (living in SF) with an au...dience of
mostly Americans I guess this is not so surprising. It irks though
because the English language internet is so dominated by US websites,
people and thinking that I look forward to some truly global thinking
in these discussions.

Bruce: "Now the Europeans really do seem to be acting old". As a Brit
I have to think twice about what you are referring to. But then I
remember that Britain is not really in Europe. ;) We've been so
cosmopolitan for so long that institutionalised racism seems a minor
issue compared with other European countries. And we didn't quite
succumb to the state sponsored, job for life, pension forever mindset
that actively discourages entrepreneurs in a sea of bureaucracy. Of
course we have our own problems and had a huge hand to play in the
banking meltdown. It's not all good, just different.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #56 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 05:05

    
*Yeah man, iPad Surface Kinect Android!

*It's great to have outlived the era of the "personal computer."  I
don't know anybody whose computer has an airgap and is entirely
"personal."  Even if this mythical guy existed, how would I ever learn
about him?

*Lately I've been reading (of all things) Isaac D'Israeli's
CURIOSITIES OF LITERATURE.  Super-geeky lit-blogger guy, our Mr.
D'Israeli.  It's pretty clear that he was overwhelmed by the bulk of
the world's intellectual minutiae a full century before Vannevar Bush.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #57 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 11 05:49

    
Cliff Collard was telling me yesterday that a single iPhone is more
powerful than the combination of all the Apple IIes that were produced.

Here's the Project Gutenberg link for D'Israeli's work:
http://www.gutenberg.org/browse/authors/d#a6393

I can relate to D'Israeli, as described by his son:

"He was himself a complete literary character, a man who really passed
his life in his library. Even marriage produced no change in these
habits; he rose to enter the chamber where he lived alone with his
books, and at night his lamp was ever lit within the same walls.
Nothing, indeed, was more remarkable than the isolation of this
prolonged existence; and it could only be accounted for by the united
influence of three causes: his birth, which brought him no relations or
family acquaintance; the bent of his disposition; and the circumstance
of his inheriting an independent fortune, which rendered unnecessary
those exertions that would have broken up his self-reliance. He
disliked business, and he never required relaxation; he was absorbed in
his pursuits. In London his only amusement was to ramble among
booksellers; if he entered a club, it was only to go into the library.
In the country, he scarcely ever left his room but to saunter in
abstraction upon a terrace; muse over a chapter, or coin a sentence. He
had not a single passion or prejudice: all his convictions were the
result of his own studies, and were often opposed to the impressions
which he had early imbibed. He not only never entered into the politics
of the day, but he could never understand them. He never was connected
with any particular body or set of men; comrades of school or college,
or confederates in that public life which, in England, is, perhaps,
the only foundation of real friendship. In the consideration of a
question, his mind was quite undisturbed by traditionary
preconceptions; and it was this exemption from passion and prejudice
which, although his intelligence was naturally somewhat too ingenious
and fanciful for the conduct of close argument, enabled him, in
investigation, often to show many of the highest attributes of the
judicial mind, and particularly to sum up evidence with singular
happiness and ability."
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #58 of 156: Engaged, confused and self-righteous (robertflink) Thu 6 Jan 11 06:24

    
>He not only never entered into the politics of the day, but he could
never understand them.<

When shall we again have such leaders?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #59 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 09:11

    
Isaac D'Israeli wasn't a political leader, just the father of one.  My
guess was that the guy was an undiagnosed Asperger's case.

But this book of his is the product of all that fetishistic reading
(in four or five languages).  And it's not lit-crit, it's just the
"curiosities"-- the freaky stuff.  Poe read the book. Hawthorne read
it.  It's scarcely a "book" at all, it's more like some primer for
erudite dandyism.

Obviously it's got nothing at all to do with the State of the World in
2011, but it sure makes reading a Twitter stream a lot more
approachable.  Plus, it's chock-full of off-the-wall anecdotes I never
heard of, and many are by no means "literary."

One of the most interesting parts of it is hearing D'Israeli
gossipping about the freaky habits of dropout bookworms who are much,
much weirder than he is.  For instance, there's a pen-portrait of the
Librarian of the Grand Duke of Tuscany, and the guy is basically a
mole.  Lives in narrow tunnels of books, sleeps on books, eats on
books.  Knows the location of every book crammed in his mansion through
some kind of geek radar.  

I'd been meaning to read this book for ages...  then got it off Google
Book Scan.  Of course.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #60 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 09:21

    
One can moan about the difficulty of keeping up with current events,
but then there's the past.  There can only be more and more past. How
can anyone keep the assorted doings of humanity straight in their head?
 It's like a vast heap of detritus struck by earthquakes.

It's agonizing to hear D'Israeli referring offhandedly to
hugely-famous period figures who are almost completely forgotten now. 
Famous preachers.  Romance novelists.  "The famous philosopher Bayle,
who died so nobly..." At one point D'Israeli refers offhandedly to
knowing Byron, and it's obvious that Byron is some kind of annoying
young punk -- the kind of writer you're better off not hearing about.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #61 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 11 09:36

    
This is what it once used to mean to be "literary," as D'Israeli
points out.

"We, count and senator, for us and our College, declare Francis
Petrarch great poet and historian, and for a special mark of his
quality as a poet, we have placed with our hands on his head a CROWN OF
LAUREL, granting to him, by tenor of these presents, and by the
authority of King Robert, of the Senate and People of Rome, in the
poetic, as well as in the historic art, and generally in whatever
relates to said arts, as well in this holy city and elsewhere, the free
and entire power of reading, disputing, and interpreting all ancient
books, to make new ones, and to compose poems, which, God assisting,
shall endure from age to age."

Petrarch's composed poems are in pretty good condition in this remote
age, but the idea of some aristocrat putting some leaves on your head
so that you have "the free and entire power" to read books in some
town...  Well, I guess that's even more freakily archaic than using
carbon paper in a manual typewriter. Although, not by a lot.

D'Israeli says that the pleasant custom of crowning Poets Laureate
with Laurel died out, basically because of grade inflation.  Laurel was
pretty cheap as foliage went, so pretty soon every passing blog
commenter wanted a crown of his own.  Then, nobody did.

A lot of the curious guys in this book are martyrs to capital-L
Literature, and they're dying for something vast and slow and powerful,
 that bears very little resemblance to anything that modern writers
do.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #62 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 11 12:53

    
When blogs appeared, many decried the low quality and trivial focus of
much of the writing, but I was blown away by how many really good
writers broke surface, absent the print world's barriers to
publication. Pre-web, we saw zines and small book publishers churning
out an unprecedented massive flow of interesting if not great writing,
much of which moved to the web as webzines and blogs started to appear
and get traction. At this point I'm not sure how I feel about this
explosion of valuable content. They say cream rises, but if there's a
real glut of cream, you can be drowning in it. And it's as if the
literary world has no shape... a mass of erudite prose has splattered
against the face of the world, Sherwin Williams-style ... how do you
sort it out? 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #63 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 6 Jan 11 13:43

    
Well there's the tools: filters,feeds,aggregators,scrapers,search
engines,networks,subscriptions,etc. and who know's what's next? All
part of our new digital learning experience. Little late in the day for
someone as old as me, but I'm taking an online class from Howard
Rheingold in order to learn how it all works and how to make it work
for me.

I'm just going to focus on one or two areas of interest to concentrate
on and rely on the curation and collaboration of others. Twitterstream
helps out there and I'm sure more sites will come. Quroa is already
taking off from Twitter.

It's like being let loose in a candy shop - have to resist the urge to
have it all, or you just get sick.

So, in an interesting way all this info overload may well help us all
become more inter-dependent on one another. Worth a shot! Nothing else
is working.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #64 of 156: gmoke (gmokecamb) Thu 6 Jan 11 16:54

    
Bill McKibben is mulling the idea of an ongoing global brainstorm on
local, practical climate change solutions and adaptations.  Something
like that is inevitable if only through such organizations as ICLEI on
a municipal level.

Congress is getting all the press and I'm not seeing a lot of coverage
of the CES this year.  Even on boingboing, this year's edition seems
to be getting mostly yawns.  Maybe this is a technological plateau
before the next ascension to a whole nother level.

It does seem as if we are living in a cover band world.  The Tea Party
Congress bids fair to be a rerun of the Contract Congress.  Hopefully,
that means there will be an Obama boom the way there was a Clinton
boom.  But let's skip the blue dresses and semen stains this time
around please.

I wonder when Bruce is going to head East and report on China, South
Korea, India, Indonesia, and Japan.  In a Viridian flashback, it might
be good to visit Australia as well.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #65 of 156: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 6 Jan 11 19:41

    
Ran across this today:

"But the web is not just some kind of magic all-absorbing meta-medium.
It's its own thing. And like other media it has a question that it
answers better than any other. That question is:

  Why wasn't I consulted?

http://www.ftrain.com/wwic.html

I'm wondering if online social gadgets are going to go out of fashion
in 2011.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #66 of 156: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 6 Jan 11 19:51

    
I'm seeing more texting, as little phone as necessary and occasional posts
to Facebook, mostly travel or event photography, as the social media of the
twentysomethings around here (Oakland / San Francisco).

Mafia Wars, Farmville etc. are for the parents to play 'on break', I
suppose.  I read last week that Mafia Wars is now a prison game played on
smuggled in phones.  What's to lose if you're already in the joint?

My son says they broke Facebook when they let us on.  Thus we have texting.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #67 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 6 Jan 11 20:02

    
I get that from my kids too. They don't even answer their phone
anymore, just text and use mobile and rarely use the Internet.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #68 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 11 02:14

    
"Abundance breaks more things than scarcity," as Clay Shirky once
abundantly said.

I used to be  involved in the paper fanzine scene, so I was never much
daunted by the supposed  "barriers to entry" in publishing.   If you
ever read a "slush pile" for a traditional publisher, you became
instantly aware that there were legions of people writing -- even
intelligent and hard-working people -- whose writing just didn't
deserve any attention from publishers.  It was no use making that stuff
widely public,  because only twenty people would read it -- and they'd
be the guy's relatives, who would think, "Wow, my cousin, the
published writer!"

Now we got blogs (for the time bein).  The "writing" there is not what
blogs have ever been about.  The writing doesn't much matter in blogs;
the blogging matters.  

The writing in my own blog isn't much good.  My blog's 'writing"
consists mostly of  wisecracks, sarcastic complaints and You Go Girl. 
It's the LINKING that is important in a blog, not the "writing".  The
screen-size snippets of  prose are in a supportive position to the work
of the blog as an entity on the Internet.

Nobody goes to my blog to read Bruce Sterling's sparkling prose.  They
just whip through the updated torrent of eldritch curiosities there. 
"My cousin the Augmented Reality guy."  "My cousin the Design Fiction
guy."  Nobody reads all of it; my blog is like a cigar-box full of
pinned, still-living bugs.   If  they find something hip they haven't
heard about, then they click on that and vanish.  

Sometimes they link back to it.  

If I stopped performing that blog, everything in it would swiftly
linkrot and die.  Nobody's gonna read that blog in 20 years, although I
wrote books 20 years ago that are still read.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #69 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 11 02:20

    

As blogging has grown older and the bandwidth has increased, more and
more  blogs are non-textual, ever less writerly.  In theory, my blog
could become a "vlog" where I don't type one word, but just stare into
the laptop camera and deliver the parenthetical wisecracks as literal
offhand remarks.  It could be a podcast, or a Tumblr.  With some work I
could probably shoehorn my blog into my FlickR set.

Here's a great modern blog.  It's all about a young, hip Jewish woman
in New York dressing up and talking about her clothes.  It's
hysterically funny, and utterly beloved by its readers, and it could
never have existed in any analog medium.

http://www.manrepeller.com/

Even the fashion magazine press loves this young woman; they hire her
to write,  sometimes.  She's indeed a pretty good "writer," but without
the pictures of the clothes and the links to her daily adventures,
there's nothing much there.  The text alone could never sustain that
scene she has created.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #70 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 11 02:22

    
The bigger blogs are struggling hard to destroy their original format
now.  It's no longer about a democratic voice for the lonely
pamphleteer shut out by analog publishing.  Nobody cares about that,
that is over.

For Gawker, it's about the optimal "post-blog" as an aggregated
branding vehicle.

http://lifehacker.com/5701749/why-gawker-is-moving-beyond-the-blog

Gawker is trying hard to saw off the ladder rungs under them, and to
act more like a feisty TV network.   That's all about creating NEW
barriers to entry, where Joe Blogger can't get a word-in because Gawker
has a professional skill-set and a uniquely designed interface... 
It's a platform for post-blog expression, a platform, like Facebook or
Twitter or maybe Fox News.  Once you control the platform, the
"writing" takes care of itself.  

Nobody seeks out the "great writing" on Facebook pages.    There's
never been a literary MySpace anthology.  "The Best-Written Blog Posts
of 2008," who would ever look at that?  It would be like seeking out
the best-orated CB radio monologues and issuing a vinyl record.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #71 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 11 02:25

    
There is no end-game in sight to the techno-transitions here.  The
"post-blog" may well destroy the blog, but there's no stability at all
in the "post-blog."  The WELL has more stability than any of these
high-bandwidth metamediated entities.  Because the WELL is cheap to run
and it's stopped fitfully struggling to keep up.  

While volatile stuff like Facebook, Gawker, Twitter -- man, the Cloud
is waiting for them.  The "post-web" is waiting, the Cloud.  And the
Cloud is gonna do to the Web what the Web did to the Net and what the
Net did to the Information Superhighway and what the Information
Superhighway did to the Arpanet.

That is, well, abundance breaking things -- over and over again. 
Mostly what it breaks is the earlier febrile efforts to exult in or
rein in the abundance.   It breaks what is already broken.

The story is one of endless pioneer shacks that had vast potential,
but were never much more than electronic frontier shacks -- "obsolete
before plateau," disrupted before anybody could get really good at
doing it.    

 The favela falls down, and you pick up the cracked and scattered
bricks and rebuild another favela.  It may be a really colossal
gold-rush favela that's drained the life out of all the rural villages,
but the streets have no names and there's no mayor.  There is no
continuity; there is no heritage.  It's a slum rather than a
civilization.  It lacks a literature.  

Life in a favela is not a dashing pioneer adventure, it's a hustle, an
endless grind.  A grind, sometimes broken by earthquakes.

If you attempt to name the streets and create a mayor, everybody packs
their hammocks and runs away as fast as they can.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #72 of 156: Ed Ward (captward) Fri 7 Jan 11 03:01

    
>>Nobody seeks out the "great writing" on Facebook pages. 

Although this isn't what you meant by that, one of my Facebook
friends, a graphic designer, got to playing with the 420-character
status-update limit, creating little snapshots with words that had a
lot of power. Being a designer, one day he made a fake book cover
called 420 Characters. I asked him if there were such a book, and he
said only in his mind. I asked my agent if there'd be a market for the
first book created exclusively on Facebook, and now 420 Characters will
be out this fall. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #73 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 11 05:48

    
*I'm quite the Twitter fiend myself, but I rather doubt that even an
exceedingly witty 140-character compilation of the coolest things ever
from a billion users is gonna outlast Petrarch.

*I could print out a Lulu book of my blog in short order... but I
wouldn't read it myself, so why force that on others?

*I don't wanna have this problem taken as some kind of crotchety
chiding of "bad content." That's certainly not my point. Because, as I
pointed out earlier about my own photographs, I'm a major offender
there.  Seven thousand mediocre photographs!  

*And I'm not gonna get any better in that line of work, because I
can't be bothered.  In theory, I could get a better camera and maybe
take classes and become more technically capable, but I don't care. 
Photography is not my metier, my heart's not in it, and I never got
involved in it until the barriers-to-entry crashed abjectly, and it got
so cheap and easy that lazy, indifferent meddlers could pitch in.  And
I'm a proud one of their membership.

*I don't intend to stop uploading photographs, either. Even though
there are billions, torrents every day, and I can't keep up even with
photoes from my circle of friends and relations. 

*On the contrary, I'm drifting into doing videos.  

*If the barriers to fabbed production keep crashing, I may be doing
objects, pretty soon.  I did a lamp once.  It wasn't all that great a
lamp, but if I could do weird generated lamps by waving my hands over
an interface, man, the world might be deluged in lamps.

*Check these out:

http://blog.ponoko.com/2011/01/06/ten-best-articles-on-furniture-lighting/

*Lotta cardboard there; lotta mulch.  Humble materials, a lot of cheap
code.  Very contemporary.  Very Favela Chic.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #74 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 11 06:18

    
<bslesins> on "Why Wasn't I Consulted": Doc Searls, carrying forward
thinking from the Cluetrain Manifesto he co-authored, has created
Project VRM (Vendor Relationship Management) at the Berkman Center at
Harvard: http://blogs.law.harvard.edu/vrm/. The point, from the "About"
page:

1. To encourage development of tools by which individuals can take
control of their relationships with organizations — especially in
commercial marketplaces.
2. To conduct research on VRM-related theories, usage of VRM tools,
and effects as adoption of VRM tools takes place.

WWIC made me think of that.

It also made me think of a multimillion-dollar web development project
I worked on, where in meetings I thought I made good sense about what
we should be doing, but a young and very confident other guy was always
more persuasive, and mostly proved wrong (the project eventually
failed). After the project died, I was hiking with someone who had been
in the meetings and asked why people so often when with the other
guy's advice. "Well, that was always obvious to me," he said. "You
tried to be collaborative. You were consulting people, asking them what
we thought we should do, as you offered your ideas. He just told them
what to do, and they did it." He was forcefully directive, and I was
collaborative and sought consultation.

I've seen this a lot since then, so I don't agree that people want to
be consulted. Some probably do, but many more just want to be led by
someone who's very positive, confident, and charismatic.

***
<bruces> Re. abundance on the Internet - David Weinberger talked about
this, "the plenum," at Fiber Fete in Lafayette, Louisiana last
February:
http://www.hyperorg.com/blogger/2010/04/23/fiberfete-and-plenums/

His followup blog post is worth reading in full (and I suspect some of
this will be in the book he's writing). Here's a longer excerpt:

"These abundances are not merely quantitative. They change the nature
of what they provide. And they refuse to stay within their own bounds.
For example, we go online to get information about a product, probably
through a mobile device. There we find customer conversations. These
voices are not confined to giving us product reviews. We are also
ubiquitously connected to pragmatic advice, to new businesses and
institutions that compete with or make use of the item we’re engaged
with, to governmental and legal information. If people are unhappy with
the product, they may use their online meeting spot as a way to
organize an activist movement.

"In other words, Clay Shirky is right: The Net makes it ridiculously
easy to form groups. In fact, when your information medium,
communication medium, and social medium are all precisely the same, its
ubiquity will make it hard not to form groups. For example, if your
child has a bad cough, of course you’ll go online. Of course you’ll
find other parents talking about their kids. Your information search
has become a communicative enterprise. Because you’re now talking with
other people who share an interest, your communication is likely to
spawn a social connection. These plenums just won’t stay apart.

"Furthermore, many of these networked groups will be hyperlocal,
especially within localities where connectivity is ubiquitous. As we
get more of these locations, hyperlocal networks will connect with
other hyperlocal networks, creating superlocal networks (although I
have no idea what I mean by that term).

"These plenums will affect all of our institutions because they remove
obstacles to our being more fully human."
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #75 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 11 06:56

    
I gave a give minute talk at Ignite Austin last year on the history
and future of media, called "Future Social" -
http://il.youtube.com/watch?v=kpiPv8bs1Ug. It was just a few minutes,
but with a lot of research and thought behind it, and I've been
thinking more about it ever since. Media started with words and
conversation, then there was writing, and then we had the insight that
we could capture and replicate the written word, so we started creating
books, very scarce because they were hard to replicate by hand. Then
the printing press was invented, and books became less scarce - but you
still had to have a press to make a book or a pamphlet or magazine,
newspaper, whatever - so there was that barrier to entry.

With scarcity, we created a lot of formalism around publishing. Anyone
could write, but only the best meaningful purposeful writing was
"accepted for publication." Hence the growing, often immense slush
piles of the world. 

What started as conversation evolved to become carefully considered
product, and only until we had low cost, mass market means of
production - "desktop publishing" - did that start to change. As in the
zine world, where anyone with a computer and a bit of savvy could
produce a publication and find ways to circulate it... all this was
catalogued in Mike Gunderloy's great zine, Factsheet Five (which Bruce
was talking about at an Austin Writer's Club meeting the night we had
our first f2f meeting in the late 80s - wasn't long before I was
publishing a zine myself, FringeWare Review, and writing for Factsheet
Five). 

Zine publishers never made any money, in fact many were operating in
the red and publishing as a labor of love or lust, so when the web
appeared as a form of publishing with even lower barriers to entry,
paper zines became webzines. bOING bOING is perhaps the most famous
example - moving it to the web saved not just money, but time (Mark
Frauenfelder was busily working at Wired Magazine by then). 

Then came blogs and social media, all more conversational - we came
full circle. I came to think of mass media as an aberration, an effect
of scarce means of production - people really want to have
conversations. Reading a book or periodical was a poor substitute,
because it was one way.

And I agree with Bruce. If you're in a conversation, and someone in
the conversation behaves like a published piece - talks on and on about
some subject - that seems wrong. 

While we were more focused on one-way publication, we learned to write
long sustained pieces, like a long investigative piece or book, and
those are still valuable, there's no substitute for them. But,
increasingly, we see mindshare committed to shorter bits of writing, as
Bruce says, with links and pointers. We surf from piece to piece,
spending less time on any one. The venues that capture our attention
and mindshare, like Facebook, do so by offering us a variety of
conversations.

Part of the genius of Facebook and Twitter is that they limit posts,
mandating shorter forms. Facebook also limits what we see, by offering
us a selective stream of posts as our default view, though we can still
see the raw stream. That incidentally means that nothing you post is
likely to be visible to all of your friends - some algorithm within
Facebook is deciding what you'll see. In the words of Elvis Costello, I
used to be disgusted by this, but now I'm amused. In abundant
information environments, I know that filtering of some kind makes
sense. Rather than give you a way to do it (as in Twitter, where you
can follow a list that's a sub of the universe of all the people you
follow), Facebook decides for you what you see as default, how dare
they? "Why wasn't I consulted!" In fact, I bet most are fine with an
algorithm that filters for them. Like the people who don't want to be
consulted, would prefer to be led.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #76 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 07:46

    
From WWIC:"If you tap into the human need to be consulted you can get
some interesting reactions. Here are a few: Wikipedia, Stack Overflow,
Hunch, Reddit, MetaFilter, YouTube, Twitter, StumbleUpon, About, Quora,
Ebay, Yelp, Flickr, IMDB, Amazon.com, Craigslist, GitHub, SourceForge,
every messageboard or site with comments, 4Chan, Encyclopedia
Dramatica. Plus the entire Open Source movement. If you spend more time
on sites like those listed here than you do reading books, watching
TV, or visiting sites like ESPN.com or NYTimes.com, then, like me, the
web is now your native medium."

The web is now your native medium. That's the transition we're going
through. Haven't had a TV in years; rarely read a newspaper, unless
it's from a Google News link; use Netflix for most of my movies and
occasional TV shows a year after syndication; radio or music playing in
the background, all off the computer,as I surf; getting into embedding
videos on my blog. And sometimes feel guilty that my reading table is
not getting used as much as it used to. Have been resisting e-books,
mostly to wean myself off the Net, but Google Books may change even
that.

I've been thinking about an HDTV with a MacMini, just to use as a
bigger monitor for all this time spent on the Net and be wireless, move
away from the desk to a comfy couch and lose the "hacker shoulders".

This transition to my new native medium is driving most of my tech
choices. Bruce and Jon's comments today are what is driving most of my
content choices. I can certainly see why the kids like mobile as their
device of choice.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #77 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 07:52

    <scribbled by tcn Fri 7 Jan 11 07:52>
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #78 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 07:54

    
P.S. Man I want those lamps and cardboard furniture. Fantastic.

Bruce and Jon, quite a lot to digest for this early in the morning.
Thanks.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #79 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 09:35

    
I take your point re: collaboration Jon. Think we are at ground zero
there, but it will happen.

Clay Shirky on Collaboration:"Conversation can be incredibly valuable
where it works well and terrible where it works badly. We need to
structure environments to promote the former and discourage the latter;
anyone who wants to get value out of convening many minds has to
create and maintain the shadow of the future, or else risk activating
the witlessness of crowds."
http://hbr.org/web/extras/hbr-agenda-2011/clay-shirky

Thoughts on creating and maintaining the shadow of the future? Shadow
is about all I can see any more.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #80 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 11 14:14

    
Clays says "people aren't naturally well behaved; we're well behaved
in environments that reward good behavior and punish bad behavior." Can
we agree that "people aren't well behaved" as a rule? I know many that
are (probably not including me, alas), so I think it's hard to
generalize. A great way to keep conversations valuable is to have
someone "own" them - here on the WELL, all the conferences or forums
have hosts, and those hosts learn to be effective in managing
conversations. The key thing is that someone responds when there's bad
behavior, discouraging it... and great hosts will find ways to support
conversations and behaviors that are, as they say in the "Firefly"
universe, "shiny." 

I think a problem with environments like Facebook and Twitter is that
no one owns the conversation, it's a free for all. People do seem to be
well enough behaved, but the conversations don't go very deep or last
very long.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #81 of 156: KUMBAYISTA! (smendler) Fri 7 Jan 11 15:19

    
having a "conversation" on Twitter is kinda like trying to play
badminton between kayaks shooting a Class 4 rapids.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #82 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 11 16:06

    
The state of the world for animals is looking pretty grim. Here's a
Google Map of mass animal deaths:
http://maps.google.com/maps/ms?ie=UTF8&hl=en&oe=UTF8&msa=0&msid=20181725633988
9828327.0004991bca25af104a22b
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #83 of 156: Peter Meuleners (pjm) Fri 7 Jan 11 16:16

    
Life in the wild has never been fun.  That's why we forted up against
it.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #84 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 18:21

    
When I was in seminary the two loose recapitulations on Luther were:
"people are no damn good; and sin and sin boldly":)

Think ownership and control of comments are key. One thing I've
noticed is that as people have moved away from avatars to managing a
real online identity they(we)seem to be more careful with their
postings.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #85 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 19:02

    
Can we talk about Net Neutrality, forking the Internet, new backbones
for it, privacy, backlash response to Wikileaks/Anonymous? That whole
cluster? Where do you both think we're going in the next year?

Bruce, your article on Wikileaks, seemed to put the kiddies to bed
(for a while). http://www.webstock.org.nz/blog/2010/the-blast-shack/
Any further reflections?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #86 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 19:15

    
As long as I'm grapeshotting questions, there seem to be a lot of
'elites' on the Net and in the world now: cognitive elites,
hacker/programmer elites, global elites ($$). Is this just part of the
normal cylce of info explosion, as you have alluded to earlier, or is
there something new in the dynamic as the great mandalla takes another
spin?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #87 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 20:33

    
Here comes the Cloud...
http://www.smartmoney.com/spending/technology/cloud-media-a-silver-lining-for-
consumers-1294256775945
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #88 of 156: Nick Pugh (nick) Fri 7 Jan 11 21:09

    
To add to the wikileak pile. any thoughts regarding the US DOJ
Subpoena of a current member of the Icelandic Parliament for twitter
records?

http://www.salon.com/news/opinion/glenn_greenwald/2011/01/07/twitter/index.htm
l
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #89 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 7 Jan 11 21:38

    
Evgeny Morozov on the future of Open Source and
IT...http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704415104576065641376054226.html
?mod=rss_Technology
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #90 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:17

    
Mild and sometimes sunny day here in glamorous Belgrade today.  Snow
melting and running headlong into the gutters.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #91 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:21

    
*I don't doubt that there are many people -- hordes -- who thrive in
conversations and group-making.  It's also true that certain barriers
to group-making have crashed. It's indeed ridiculously easy to form
online groups.

*That doesn't make them into effective and important groups, though. 
It makes them the political equivalent of rather mediocre FlickR
photos.  "Easy to share, cheap to make, and who cares."  

*This planet is not run by public-spirited online activists who got
together because their kids had the croup.  Not even.  Ultra-wealthy
mogul investors are the dominant "group" in 2011. Those guys are about
the most private people imaginable.  The chance of you giving them
feedback that matters?  Not on  the agenda.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #92 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:24

    


*If everybody has to get online in order to 'participate," that
removes  the classics from our civic discourse.  That means that we can
no longer derive advantage from the wisdom of dead people.  Because
the dead don't "participate." 

*When I'm reading D'Israeli's CURIOSITIES OF LITERATURE, (as many
before me have done for two centuries), I'm not consulted in  the
editorial choices there.  I have no Comments section where I can decry
the book's unfortunate fondness for boring Scholastic theology.  If it
were up to me as a participant in the D'Israeli discourse, I'd
vote-down all the Latin and Ancient Greek tags.  

*But there's something impertinent, blinkered and pathetic about that
attitude.  One does not read a 200-year-old work because it suits the
modern milieu. You read it because it doesn't.  

*I don't wanna get all Nicholas Carr here and claim that Google warps
our brains.  It's because of Google that I've got myself a scanned copy
of Isaac D'Israeli. But it's very valuable to share a written
experience that people have had for two centuries. That gives you a way
to measure yourself against events and judge the tenor of cultural
change.

*D'Israeli's analog method of discourse  can't suit the algorithms of
Facebook.  That's a feature, it's not a bug.  Zuckerberg, he's an
ambitious geek, and I'm okay about him, but his frail, goofy platform
should not become some ultimate arbiter of civilized discourse.  It
isn't, and  Zuckerberg himself wouldn't claim that.  It's
platform-centric critics who are trying to totally remodel our culture
around software and online business models -- that's who is off the
road and rather out in the briars.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #93 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:26

    

*Facebook won't last, because it can't last.  Zuck has built a big
rickety gizmo.  Goldman Sachs says it's worth 50 billion, but AOL
bought Time Warner once, and where are they now?  

*If you're on Facebook today, you just became the "friend" of Goldman
Sachs.  Are you all proud about that?  Do you want to tell your kids? 
Bring 'em into the room and gather them around your knee and explain
how you "participated" in that.  Explain how great that was for their
future interests.

*It's not a sign of advancement when you can no longer connect with
the past.  That does not make you free. It  makes you useless.  You
become stupefied when you can no longer learn from the experience of
previous generations.   If you can't look backward, then  you can't
look forward.  

*You have also forfeited your connection to the generations that will
exist after your own death.  You can't understand your grandparents? 
Then your grandchildren will be embarrassed by you.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #94 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:27

    

*When "your information medium, communication medium, and social
medium are all precisely the same," you are looking at the world
through a pinhole.  It may well be that certain aspects of
"information, communication and sociality" are converging through
TCP/IP right now, but that situation won't last.  

*That situation won't be allowed to stabilize.  It won't even be
allowed to legalize.  Everybody in cyberculture has been meticulously
trained in radical disruption.  Moore's Law is the only law they have
ever respected.  The multi-decade track record of innovation there
shows wave after wave of technosocial disruption.  Every time that new
gold rush beckons, most everything built by the pioneers vaporizes like
data from a broken hard disk.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #95 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:28

    
*Right now, Google, Apple, Facebook and Microsoft are all competing,
not in the market, but in rendering one another irrelevant.  

*The victory condition for Google is a Google browser OS where Apple,
Facebook and Microsoft rot away like GeoCities.  Because they have
become meaningless.  The things they sell to stay alive, Google gives
away like so much free disk space.

*Apple's victory condition is sleek, chrome-lined walled garden where
everybody seeks shelter.  Because the rest of the IT world is so badly
designed and so dysfunctional that no one can make any money there.

*Microsoft is the arrogant monopoly that pioneered in "knifing the
baby" and "stealing the oxygen."

*Facebook redefines the whole shebang as cozy sociality, and then
makes you sell your wife, kids, colleagues and best friends to Goldman
Sachs.

*Then there's the free-software guys.  They've got the political
mindshare of anarchists or gypsies, but they've always been around. 
They're not going away, and it may be that time is on their side.

*I don't weep in my beer about this.  It's fascinating to watch a
paradigmatic combat that is so unlike any 20th-century capitalist
struggle.  But obviously that situation is radically unstable.  The
participants there are trying to destroy one another's very reasons for
being.  They don't want the opponent to have less market-share.  They
want them to vanish.  To vaporize. Forever.

*And when that paradigm does vanish -- and you were committed to
participating in that? -- your works fold up and go away, like so many
Delicious links.  

*"Delicious folded?  Why wasn't I consulted?"  Consult away, pal.  You
might consult about CompuServe, while you're at it.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #96 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:29

    
*Twitter pundits coming out of their skins about that Twitter subpoena
right now.  Jeez, you'd think they owned the thing themselves just
because their contributions built it.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #97 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 11 05:34

    <scribbled by bruces Sat 8 Jan 11 05:35>
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #98 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 8 Jan 11 06:03

    
That's the Bruce we all know and love. Zounds!

So much for cyberutopianism, didn't think that would last long. Don't
expect we can hope for any noblesse oblige from the Global Elite. What
are they going to do, build their private spaceships while they suck
the planet dry? Do they even have a cohesive agenda other than vested
self-interest?

The planet's future seems to be a coin flip at the moment. A flowchart
with Climate Change at the top - solved, notsolved - proceed
accordingly. Except there is no customer service number to call.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #99 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 8 Jan 11 06:32

    
There are plenty of weapons of mass digital distraction. And you and
Jon both stress vaporization. Just part of the flow of chaotic
disruption during transitions like this? Or something bigger?

<53> "You can potentially be wired to content and games every minute
of the day, insulated from the world at large, without thinking a
single unique thought of your own. Welcome home, Neo."

<94> Really appreciate your 'pinhole' description, visually profound.
It struck me a bit like Alice Through the Looking Glass. I'm not sure
which pill to take; think I'll take the one that makes me smaller. Part
of the Net Delusion that Clay Shirky talks about is that we fall into
the illusion that cyberspace allows us to be bigger than we are. No
doubt it offers greater connectivity, etc. but at the end of the day
... (fill in the blank).

Still, I'm optimistic. Just a better way to travel, IMHO.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #100 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 06:59

    
I give talks on the history and future of media, and on the history,
evolution, and history of the Internet. I gave the talk this week to a
small group gathered for lunch in a coworking space here in Austin, and
after hearing the talk a technologist I know, Gray Abbott, suggested
that I say more about the coming balkanization of the network as the
most likely scenario. The Internet is a network of networks that
depends on cooperative peering agreements - I carry your traffic and
you carry mine. The high speed Internet is increasingly dependent on
the networks of big providers, the telcos or cable companies like AT&T,
Sprint, Verizon, Time Warner, and Comcast. They all see the
substantial value supported by their networks and want to extract more
of it for themselves. They talk about the high cost of bandwidth as a
rationale for charging more for services  - or metering services - but
I think the real issue is value. When you see Google and Facebook and
Netflix making bundles of money using your pipes, you want a cut. And
if you've also tried to get into the business of providing content,
it's bothersome to see your network carrying other competing content
services, including guerilla media distribution via BitTorrent.

However higher costs could become a barrier. The value of the Internet
is a network effect - it's more valuable as more people use it to do
more things; cost as a barrier to entry could reduce participation and
diminish the Internet's value. Killing the golden goose, so to speak.
Low cost barriers also stimulate innovation. If I want to create a
television series, aside from production costs, I also have to find a
broadcast or cable network that will carry it - I have to get
permission, in effect, because broadcast and cable channels are
relatively scarce and relatively expensive to get into. Larry Lessig
pointed out, in his review of The Social Network, the real story of
Mark Zuckerberg - that he could build Facebook from nothing without
asking anybody's permission. 

"Network neutrality" is about limiting restrictions on use and
access,not necessarily about controlling cost, though it might mitigate
against "toll roads" on the information superhighway. According to the
Wikipedia article on net neutrality, "if a given user pays for a
certain level of Internet access, and another user pays for the same
level of access, then the two users should be able to connect to each
other at the subscribed level of access." That doesn't really suggest a
low cost of entry, and even with "neutral" networks (or, as we prefer
to say these days, an Open Internet), the overall cost of access could
increase, or there could be metering that would contain some sorts of
activities, like video transmissions. Right now I have unmetered or
flat rate access, so I could watch all the Netflix and Hulu I want
without additional cost. 

Time warner or AT&T Uverse customers are dropping the cable television
services because they can download all the programs they want via the
Internet service from the same company. I can imagine companies looking
at stats - more and more customers dropping the service, more and more
bandwidth dedicated to streaming and BitTorrent. It's no wonder these
companies are feeling cranky, and it's no wonder they're talking about
finding ways to charge more money. But this is what their customers
want.

This isn't really about the Internet as an information service or a
platform for sharing and collaboration. This is about the Internet as a
channel for media, an alternative to cable television. One fear many
of us have had is that big network companies will push that
interpretation. "It's time for the Internet to grow up, we want to make
a real network with real quality of service, we want to make it more
like our cable networks." Which are more tightly controlled, of course,
and carry only the content the providers agree to carry.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #101 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 07:25

    
Ted, your last post slipped in while I was composing my Internet rant.
I wouldn't say that I'm optimistic - I'm agnostic. The "radically
unstable" situation that Bruce describes is complex, and like complex
weather it can be hard to predict accurately, though computer
technology has made weather prediction more accurate... maybe we need
sociopolitical weather reports driven by sophisticated algorithms
crunching numbers, though I wouldn't know how to source those numbers.

I'm learning to observe, listen, reserve judgement. Given my Buddhist
and Gurdjieffian predilections, I'm also observing the observer, and
that's a real puzzle. Memories pop into my head, and I can't imagine
how I managed to hold them for so long. And I'm not sure how real they
are - I've learned that memory is suspect.

Literature preserves memories, and as Bruce says, "it's very valuable
to share a written experience that people have had for two centuries."
I realize that when I read a book, I'm recreating the author's
experience in my head, where it resonates with my own, two sets of
experiences mingling and producing a new internal experience. When we
read a book over, it's not the same experience we had when we read it
before, and it's not the same experience the author had, in writing it.
It's a new experience.

We all have limited "cognitive surplus," as Shirky would say; limited
time and mindshare. This is why social media has been so troublesome
for marketing people, who were confident that mass mindshare would be
committed daily to a predictable and manageable set of channels -
television, radio, newspapers. Now it's fragmented across a bazillion
channels of Internet media - blogs and social networks, email lists,
forums like this one, online media channels like YouTube and Flickr,
online channels for formerly mass media like Hulu and Netflix. 

When there are limited media channels, there are also predictably
limited ways that people experience media and messages, therefore more
social and cultural coherence. Television gave us that coherence, or
instance. Now we're clustering in social and cultural niches, common
understanding is harder to reach across niches. Politically, we're
polarized. We don't know how to hear and synthesize opinions from other
camps, other strains of thinking. So many spend their cognitive
surplus in echo chambers...
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #102 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 07:41

    
From Kieran O'Neill, via Facebook:

The Evgeny Morozov article Ted linked raises an interesting divide in
the world regarding data privacy. Where countries like the US, Russia
and China (slightly more so the latter two, but only slightly) are
actively pursuing technologies to facilitate eavesdropping on their
citizens' data and communications, others, like Canada and the European
Union, have been passing laws strictly limiting the ways in which
government (or any other individual) can use a person's information.

How do you see this divide developing over the years to come?

I'm certainly very aware, living in and having lived in countries with
data protection laws, that I at least have legal recourse in those
countries regarding use of my data, whereas any data I send South of
the border (from Canada to the US) is fair game....
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #103 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 07:42

    
From Reid Harward, via Facebook:

When I want to connect with the past, I do it through JSTOR, not
Facebook. However, to do that I have to have some sort of relationship
with a school, to cover my library fees. It bothers me that not
everyone has this opportunity. What about the idea of free education
for the global masses? Has the internet failed to make good on this
promise? What sort of emergent behavior would we see in a world where
education was democratized on a global scale?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #104 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 07:54

    
Reid, there was a relevant presentation at SXSW last year, on
"Universities in the Era of Free." I blogged about it:
http://weblogsky.com/2010/03/27/sxsw-2010-notes-universities-in-the-era-of-fre
e/

More and more structured knowledge sources are moving online. For
example, you can get a degree through online studies at the University
of the People: http://www.uopeople.org/. MIT has its Open Courseware:
http://ocw.mit.edu/index.htm.  Less formally and less structured, there
are the Ted Talks: http://www.ted.com/talks.

And check out Sal Khan: http://www.khanacademy.org/press/fortune and
his Khan Academy: http://www.khanacademy.org/ From the Fortune article
about Khan:

"Khan Academy, with Khan as the only teacher, appears on YouTube and
elsewhere and is by any measure the most popular educational site on
the web. Khan's playlist of 1,630 tutorials (at last count) are now
seen an average of 70,000 times a day -- nearly double the student body
at Harvard and Stanford combined. Since he began his tutorials in late
2006, Khan Academy has received 18 million page views worldwide,
including from the Gates progeny. Most page views come from the U.S.,
followed by Canada, England, Australia, and India. In any given month,
Khan says, he's reached about 200,000 students. 'There's no reason it
shouldn't be 20 million.'"
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #105 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 08:10

    
Responding to Kieran on privacy, and with limited time: that word
"privacy" is probably too vague to be meaningful. I think the question
of who should and who does know what about whom is complex and can vary
with context. Privacy might be better addressed through a set of
specific cases. For example, airport body scanners, which are a kind of
technology mediated strip search. Will these save lives, and are they
therefore justified? Or have we gone too far?
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #106 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 8 Jan 11 10:59

    
DOJ's court order for Twitter's release of WikiLeaks tweets is a real
thrill:http://techcrunch.com/2011/01/07/twitter-informs-users-of-doj-wikileaks-court-
order-didnt-have-to/.
At least Twitter got the judge to release the gag order. About as much
as you can hope for these days.

This relates to the Open Internet, data privacy, and the "pipes". I
don't think anyone can post anything anymore without being aware that
it is all pretty much retrievable and the ISP's will cave. It's a
business after all.

I hope we all learned from the '60's and '70's in Chicago, Seattle,
Prague, and Tiananmen Square in the '80's that you can't throw stones
at tanks. Low Orbit Ion Cannons don't work either.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #107 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 8 Jan 11 11:03

    
Jon earlier in Inkwell.vue you hosted a conversation about Digital
Habitats, much of which went right over my head at the time. I just
want to put a link here because it is pertinent,bears re-reading, and
is open to
all...https://user.well.com/engaged.cgi?c=inkwell.vue&f=0&t=386&q=0-
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #108 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 17:06

    
Thanks for posting that - it was a great discussion about stewardship
of technologies and communities. Nancy White is a longtime great
friend, and an incredible source of knowledge about technologies for
collaboration. We should post a link to her website:
http://fullcirc.com.

Online communities are everywhere, and when you read the various "best
practices" guides, you realize those are all things we learned on the
WELL two decades ago... the practices haven't changed, because people
are people. The patterns don't change that much, either. For instance,
a blog post with comments is not that different from an initial post
followed by responses here on the WELL. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #109 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 11 17:26

    
Back in post #36, Bruce said "there aren't any assassinations, which
America used to be so famous for." Looks like you spoke too soon.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #110 of 156: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 8 Jan 11 17:52

    
I'd disagree that dead people aren't around in the modern Internet,
but they do need live people to represent them and promote them and
write the Wikipedia article. The source material is a search away, once
someone gets interested in it and explains why others should care.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #111 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 8 Jan 11 19:27

    
I also take Bruce's point about great lit. I've been rereading Marcus
Aurelius' Meditations, admittedly because it's free on Google Books.
It is fresh and pertinent in every way and I've been thinking I need
to reread some of the Greeks and Shakespeare again. Also been reading a
lot of History these past few years, mainly Middle Eastern, Asian, and
am starting on Indonesia. Woefully ignorant in all those areas. As the
global villages develop, I know I need to lose this American-centric
viewpoint that is so embedded in my brain. Afraid of Bollywood and
another obsession and my brother is hooked on South Korean soap operas.
It's all graspable these days.

There really is nothing new under the sun, and trite as it may be, the
more things change, the more they remain the same. Unless we really go
posthuman and AI's. 

Bruce, if I remember correctly, you put the AI argument to bed, with
something like "we are analog, they are digital". I'm wondering if the
lines of development are going to result in some super AI that has some
kind of self-awareness (although not human consciousness) that
posthumans would plug into or visa versa? Sort of the whole idea in
reverse. I had my aluminum foil hat on as I wrote this last paragraph:)
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #112 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 02:38

    
*Hmm.  Oh well, so much for the lack of American guntoting political
assassinations.

*This should be pretty lively. Even Wikileaks is taking a back seat.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #113 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 02:47

    
"He was ready for war. He was not playing around," Joe Zamudio told
CNN. "He was going to keep shooting. It was not over. He had just ran
out of bullets." 
http://news.blogs.cnn.com/2011/01/08/several-people-shot-at-arizona-store-poli
ce-official-says/?hpt=T1

I was tempted to connect this with the New Year's Day conversation I
mentioned earlier, where a guy in rural Travis County, Texas told me he
and others were stocking up on guns and ammo, and the revolt's coming.
Then again, this could be just another solo nut job with a gun.

From that same CNN blog, quoting the Pima County sheriff: "The anger,
the hatred the bigotry that goes on in this country is getting to be
outrageous and unfortunately, Arizona has become the capital. We have
become the mecca of prejudice and bigotry."
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #114 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 03:02

    
http://www.boingboing.net/2011/01/08/youtube-videos-of-ar.html

*Well, if there's any accuracy to these transcripts, this poor guy is
schizophrenic.  I'm seeing strenuous efforts to pin a political
allegiance on him.  But he's incoherent.

*There must be some broken reason that he picked on a politician
instead of shooting up a school or workplace.  Wonder what that was.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #115 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 03:28

    
I just spent some time surfing news reports, and nobody seems to have
a handle on they guy's motivation; given the twisted logic in his
online comments, that may be hard to assess. 

This shooting punctuates the emergence of a particularly nasty
political era, and it's hard to separate what's happened from Sarah
Palin's "targets" and something like this:
http://www.boingboing.net/2011/01/08/Screen-shot-2011-01-08-at-11.43.jpg
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #116 of 156: Nick Pugh (nick) Sun 9 Jan 11 03:46

    
This link does a decent job of gathering the pieces without jumping to
conclusions.

http://azstarnet.com/news/local/crime/article_78272a23-fe75-5bee-ba38-f8171cda
3fb7.html

I wish someone could explain his definition of literacy, seems to play
a central role.

Also interesting, the media grasping to make sense of his list of
favorite books on MySpace...

"He lists among his favorite books "Mein Kampf" and "The Communist
Manifesto". But he also includes a broad variety of other titles,
including: "Animal Farm," "Brave New World," "To Kill a Mockingbird,"
and "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest"."

 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #117 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 06:55

    
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/pakistan/8248162/The-killer-of-
my-father-Salman-Taseer-was-showered-with-rose-petals-by-fanatics.-How-could-t
hey-do-this.html

*Now there is a political assassination.  Enthusiastic crowds shower
the assassin's paddywagon with rose-petals.  I don't think Jared's
gonna much of this treatment.  Jared's gonna get showered with
ugly-paint, and then pinned to the other side for partisan advantage.  

*Atheist, communist, fascist, gold-bug, Palin fan -- not to mention
staunch science fiction reader -- Orwell, Bradbury, Huxley...  Jared's
wits were so scattered that he seems to have touched and defiled
everything.

*I once had a long bus-ride with a reeking, sweaty, jittery madman who
had clearly once been a formidably intelligent and very well-read
scholar.  It seemed pretty clear to me that it had been a long time
since anybody had been able to indulge him in a conversation. 
Although, he couldn't really "converse,"  because his cognitive
deficits no longer allowed him a coherent train of thought.  There was
something pitiful yet majestic about that guy.  He was like a
fragmentary Roman ruin.

*The bus driver asked me if the guy was dangerous, or if he was
troubling me.  Well, maybe he was.  He could have been "dangerous."  He
 was mad.

*This man was grateful that I talked to him -- or more or less at him,
anyway.   The depths of his illness could relieve him from human
loneliness.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #118 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 06:56

    
http://www.iranian.com/main/2011/jan/death-prince

*In other political assassination news, the youngest son of the Shah
of Iran has just shot himself.  You'll  notice that even though Ali
Reza Pahlavi gunned HIMSELF down  (in the USA of course, because that's
where the handguns are) a partisan argument still breaks out about
him,  and every interested party brings tar-babies and ouija boards.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #119 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 06:58

    

*This Twitter subpoena (not formally a "subpoena" apparently, but a
network-mapping effort by the DOJ to understand the Wikileaks
phenomenon) has made my  Tweeple realize that they've got some personal
skin in the game.  637,000 people transformed from idle
keyboard-tappers into a suspect global dissident class.  Given that
there are maybe six hardcore Wikileaks dudes, that's quite an
achievement.

*I wrote an article about Wikileaks a while ago.  I got some minor
flack about that, because I was expressing my general dread and sorrow
about the situation, rather than taking some firm partisan stance that
clears it all up.  Well, it ain't gonna get all cleared up.      A
brouhaha like this one could rank with Monica Lewinsky or the Dreyfuss
Affair.  Sum it all up at this point, and you're like somebody
pontificating in a sawgrass marsh in the Everglades.

*I'm waiting for the next big leaky shoe to drop, and I don't think
it'll have anything to do with Assange.  It's gonna be somebody else,
likely some newfangled cyberwar intelligence service, who is watching
from the shadows.  They're seeing just how much fun and mischief there
is in leaking big heaps of purloined government data.  

*Why DDOS the likes of Estonia if you can torment them more
effectively by making them "transparent?"

*The Department of Justice wants to make the Wikileaks Tweeple
"transparent."  You can see how much they like that.

*It sure gets tiring to watch social struggles when everybody defines
themselves as the inspired mavericks on the side of the angels. 
Where's the good-old-fashioned evil? Even Al Qaeda wakes up every
morning with a prayer for justice on their bearded lips.  They gotta
stock up those rose-petals for a sworn bodyguard who would shoot his
own boss at the mall.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #120 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 07:51

    
<113> From that same CNN blog, quoting the Pima County sheriff: "The
anger,
the hatred the bigotry that goes on in this country is getting to be
outrageous and unfortunately, Arizona has become the capital. We have
become the mecca of prejudice and bigotry."

Well that's not helpful. Living in Phoenix, I have to rant. We aren't
the mecca of anything but old folks who like to golf and immigrants who
want to work the jobs no one else wants or is willing to do. And, for
the most part, we all get along very well. Our crazy Immigration bill,
which even we don't understand, is a knee-jerk response to Washington's
inability to address the problem. The recent failure of the Dream Act
is just one more example. 

The political fact is that we are going to need even more immigrants
to fill these jobs and it is hypocritical for Washington to pretend
otherwise, 20 million, yes million!, more according to recent
forecasts:http://www.rapidimmigration.com/1_eng_immigration_facts.html

It's no coincidence that our own Janet Napolitano is head of Homeland
Security. Phoenix is becoming, if not already, the major U.S. center
for drug smuggling from Mexico. We have more than 230 DEA agents
stationed here to deal with the problem and they are losing the battle
every day. You could expel all the immigrants and it would not change
that fact.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #121 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 07:54

    
And we don't think of them as immigrants. They are our neighbors, our
co-workers, our friends and our children and grandchildren's friends.
Only politicians call them immigrants.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #122 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 08:13

    
In the U.S., we keep our rose petals close to the vest.

Dick Armey, leader of the Tea Party, on ABC's This Week:

"Why did this fella do this? The answer will come from psychology, not
from sociology or political science…. We really want to understand
deviance and danger in this country. We should apply the correct field
of study, the correct disciplines and tools of understanding, with
rigor and responsibility, not just exercising pop sociology out of our
hip pocket."

I.e. "I know a bunch of amateur thinkers are going to call this an
effect of Tea Party rhetoric, but don't blame us. We may be meaner than
hell, but we're not crazy."
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #123 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 08:16

    
What happened in Tucson is a tragedy by any definition. Jon and I have
both alluded to what we're hearing from otherwise 'normal' people. I
think it's an undercurrent to the political non-conversation this
country has been having for the last 10 years. These people don't
identify with any party, they consider themselves to be patriotic -
what does that even mean anymore? - Americans who love their country
and sense they are losing their voice and any hope for their and their
children's way of life. (Cue Dylan's Ballad of a Thin Man here).

Washington's broke and none of these clowns who co-opt middle
America's fears are going to fix it. The system does not work.About the
only products we export are guns, planes and missles and Eisenhower's
warnings about the military-industrial complex have come home to roost.


Welcome to Dystopia. And I'm still optomistic. It may have to get
worse to get better, but better is our only choice - here and globally.

If nothing else, Bruce and Jon, you have given me a more sober look at
our possible futures. It's going to be a longer row to hoe, but "inch
by inch".
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #124 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 08:39

    
Amy Davidson, in The New Yorker:

"But this isn’t just on Arizona; that state is not the only quarter of
the country in which a sort of extremism has taken hold—and a sort of
contempt, which has not been entirely confined to one side or the
other, or to madmen as opposed to ostensibly sane ones. Obama said that
the tragedy was broader than Giffords’s or her state’s, and it was—not
only because, while she was the target, others were killed, but
because our political culture was attacked and (again, with the caveat
that the gunman’s precise motives and soundness of mind aren’t known)
was also implicated. Congressmen John Boehner and Eric Cantor, and
Senator John McCain, all released statements that had a word in common:
“horrified.” It’s a proper word—this is horrifying—and undoubtedly a
lot of people used it Saturday. But to the extent to which it’s meant
to convey surprise, it may not be quite right."

http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/closeread/2011/01/a-shooting-in-arizona.
html#ixzz1AYadVCLU
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #125 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 08:48

    
Also in The New Yorker, George Packer writes that "many conservative
leaders, activists, and media figures have made a habit of trying to
delegitimize their political opponents. Not just arguing against their
opponents, but doing everything possible to turn them into enemies of
the country and cast them out beyond the pale.... This relentlessly
hostile rhetoric has become standard issue on the right. (On the left
it appears in anonymous comment threads, not congressional speeches and
national T.V. programs.) And it has gone almost entirely uncriticized
by Republican leaders. Partisan media encourages it, while the
mainstream media finds it titillating and airs it, often without
comment, so that the gradual effect is to desensitize even people to
whom the rhetoric is repellent. We’ve all grown so used to it over the
past couple of years that it took the shock of an assassination attempt
to show us the ugliness to which our politics has sunk."

http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/georgepacker/2011/01/judging-from-his-in
ternet-postings.html#ixzz1AYccT5DT
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #126 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 09:49

    
*French leak-clone wannabe attempts suicide.

http://www.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2011/01/09/le-createur-du-site-wikileaks
13-tente-de-se-suicider_1463078_3224.html

*This leaking stuff isn't for sissies.

*Fifteen young men found decapitated in abandoned cars in Acapulco. 
There's a society with some violence issues.  I wonder where they came
from, and what they did to give offense.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #127 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 09:53

    
http://www.smh.com.au/environment/weather/nasa-satellites-capture-amazing-pict
ures-of-queensland-floods-20110106-19gql.html

*Australian CO2-mining district under water.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #128 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 10:26

    
<53> "The monkeys in our heads are rattled, they're bouncing and
swinging
out of control. Streams of thought block awareness of the moment.
We're
somnambulists in a world of persistent dreams that are not necessarily
our own. The voices in our heads are not inherently our own, and not
inherently friendly. And there are so many of them."

As usual you two are hop,skip and jumping through so many ideas it's
going to take months to digest.

Rereading the conversation and this just leaps out. That is beautiful
prose Jon and totally nails it, for my head at least.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #129 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 10:48

    
<94>*When "your information medium, communication medium, and social
medium are all precisely the same," you are looking at the world
through a pinhole.  It may well be that certain aspects of
"information, communication and sociality" are converging through
TCP/IP right now, but that situation won't last.  

Been thinking about this for days. Your pinhole analogy is apt and
scary. And I'm glad it won't last. But for now, it's truly being
manipulated by the media and spin masters. It's like they focus that
pinhole as a laser beam to warp and weave those voices Jon is talking
about. And the speed with which this stuff gets disseminated is unreal.

Sarah Palin has already wiped her website: RT @sarabethbrooks: quick
scrub of @sarahpalinusa's website no longer lists @Rep_Giffords , it
did an hr ago: (from Twitter).

So much for owning your own words.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #130 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 11:04

    
The crazy doesn't stop. 

Fred Phelps says "God sent the shooter... mouthy witch Sarah Palin had
Representative Giffords in the crosshairs on her website. She quick
took it down, however, because she's a cowardly brute like the rest of
you. The crosshairs to worry about are God's... and he's put you in
his, and your destruction is upon you. You should have obeyed. This
nation of violent murderers is in full rebellion against God. God
avenged himself on you today by a marvelous work in Tucson. He sits in
heaven and laughs at you in your affliction. Westboro Baptist Church
prays for more shooters, more violent veterans, and more dead. Praise
God for his righteous judgments in this earth..."

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qpkxoql4xz0
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #131 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 9 Jan 11 12:10

    
RT @dangillmor: Today's mediastorm is a reminder of @cshirky's great
line: Fact checking is down, but after-the-fact checking is way up

Another from Twitter.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #132 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 11 12:12

    
*The Right deserves a scolding for their culture war, but the killer
was a longhaired, pot-smoking science fiction reader.  Hope they don't
round 'em all up.

*If everybody Sarah Palin targeted gets shot, that sure would mean a
bunch of dead Republicans.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #133 of 156: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Sun 9 Jan 11 12:13

    
#116: I've already seen people say that since he has Mein Kampf listed
as a book, he must be a Socialist, because Nazis are the National
*Socialist* party.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #134 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 12:46

    
And they're quick to point out that Fred Phelps is a Democrat.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #135 of 156: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 9 Jan 11 16:45

    
From julian.bond@voidstar.com:

There's been a certain amount of discussion so far about the past and 
especially past literature. This is not strictly in the same area but 
I'll toss it out and see if it sticks.

I'm interested in Bruce's thoughts on History/Futurology in these
times of rapid growth as someone who's turned their hand to factual
futurology occasionally. The most thought provoking event I went to
last year was Doctorow vs Gibson where Gibson talked a lot about the
contraction of now. Back in the 50s, "Now" seemed to be at least 5
years long. That allowed people to think in terms of predicting the
future 20 years or so out. Sometimes it seems these days that "now" is
more like 5 months long and future prediction is only remotely reliable
2 years out.

A few datapoints. Last year was probably the first year when the total
information in the world doubled in under 12 months. Bizarrely,
there'snot enough long term storage to store it all so a lot of that
information is in short term storage and will be forgotten. That 
information generation is still accelerating. Another one. Most of 
China's provinces expect >10% growth next year but central gov is 
telling them to slow down for energy supply and environmental reasons.
This level of growth is not exclusively Chinese and is happening in
other pockets as well. Much to think about here. Not least of which is
the hierarchy of control in China and it's inability to actually
control what's happening. The provincial governments are just as much
bystanders in this game as the central one when it's the burgeoning
middle class and entrepreneurial companies that are driving it
forwards.

We humans have a hard time understanding high rates of compound
exponential growth. It makes history irrelevant when what happened 3
doubling periods ago is now only 7% of the total. It makes the future
hard to see when today is going to be only 7% of the total in 3
doubling period's time. When the doubling period is under one year,
that's only a 6 year window. To make the example more extreme, the
total information at the end of this year will be 7 times the total at
the beginning of last year. That's a 24 month window. When I say
history is becoming irrelevant, I'm not talking so much about the
nuggets of great art or the important events but things like people's
personal photos / blogs / diaries.

I'm trying hard not to fall into the Singularity or 2012 delusion here
but this feels like a sound barrier like shockwave that we're 
accelerating towards. The problem is that in many areas we're on the 
steep part of the S-curve. While we can see the peak and it's
associated slow down or overshoot/crash, in many cases (energy supply,
pollution limits) it still feels like it's a long way off. But that's
the understanding exponential growth problem. When you're down to 50%
of remaining resources it still feels intuitively like there's plenty
of head room, but actually you're only one doubling period or less away
from running out if the rate of use is roughly the same order as the
size of resource. The end of the runway a mile away has a way of
sneaking up on you when you've hit 100mph and you've still got your
foot hard on the gas.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #136 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 11 21:13

    
When the "Y2K bug" was acknowledged, and I was working on a mitigation
project, I was talking to a nontechnical friend of mine who was ready
to move to the desert with stores of food and guns, convinced disaster
was certain. And it might've been rough - but mitigation teams all over
the world were aware of the problem, doing the analysis, making the
necessary adjustments.

The Y2K problem was clear, discrete, easy to understand, and
solveable. That's a good problem to have.

Julian is talking about wicked problems. A wicked problem is "a
problem that is difficult or impossible to solve because of incomplete,
contradictory, and changing requirements that are often difficult to
recognize. Moreover, because of complex interdependencies, the effort
to solve one aspect of a wicked problem may reveal or create other
problems."
(https://secure.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/wiki/Wicked_problem)

Global climate change is wicked problem, hard to solve because it's
not well understood, and there are conflicting and contradictory
interests creating a fog of information, disinformation, and
misinformation. 

But...

What Julian says in that last post, and what I've said so far in this
one, is more shadow than light - concepts and abstractions obscuring
what's real.

The deeper we get into the fog, the less real we are, the harder it is
to solve the wicked problems.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #137 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 04:51

    
http://thismodernworld.com/archives/5557

*I wouldn't claim there's no American political violence lately, but
really, by the Red-State Blue-State standards of Chickamauga and
Gettysburg, it's been very low-key.  Even this particular horrid
incidents ranks as a "tragedy" rather than some incipient coup.  It'll
fade like most other American lone-gunman massacres.  Unless it turns
out the guy had an accomplice, which I doubt.

My favorite Twitter barometer, @SarahPalinUSA keeping a low profile
lately.  When this thing blows over like that indignation over
Columbine, she'll be back.  Not to demand blood or anything, because
Sarah's not violent.  She'll be reassuming her favorite role as
innocent Christian martyr to the Liberal LameStream Media lynch mob.

Of course every fellow "common sense conservative" knows Sarah had
nothing to do with the trigger pulled on a fellow female American
politician.  The more that partisan lightning falls on her, the more it
affirms her cultural importance.  She's the woman who resigned from
elective office to assume the role of the Tea Party Joan of Arc.  

Sarah's opponents keep thinking that the smell of loathsome opprobrium
will drive her out of American public life.  That's what the Right
thought about Bill Clinton.

Sarah is here to stay.  Unless, that is, somebody shoots Sarah.  Then
there will be hell to pay.  And the likelihood of that?  It just shot
way, way up.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #138 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 04:53

    
Well, we're cruising to a close in a bloody haze of maniacal gunfire,
so I want to write a little concluding essay here,  about a certain
Brazilian pop musician, and why she makes me eagerly anticipate what
comes next.

I happen to be quite the Cibelle Cavalli devotee, and it's not because
of her music (although her music is pretty good, if you like exotic
Brazilian electronica with diva vocals).   Pop stars are always
interesting to me, while musicians interest me only on occasion. 
Musicians create works of music.  Popstars create wannabes.  Musicians
can be very private people, while popstars are public media figures who
inspire some social emulation.  

Here I think Cibelle has rather a lot to offer,  as a contemporary
working artist in a 21st-century avant-garde position.  

I surmise that this decade is gonna reveal a lot more people who are
doing what Cibelle is doing -- following her strategy, although, likely
not quite in the way she is doing it.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #139 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 04:54

    
First, she's offshored.  She's based in London (to the extent that
she's based anywhere), although she's originally from Sao Paulo.  So
she represents Brazilian Globalization.  She's not American, yet her
fan-base is extensively globalized (her record label is Belgian.  She
tours Turkey, Europe, and the US).

Second, she's electronic and digital. She's got a band, or at least
some London guys willing to accompany her in some of her
peregrinations, but as her career has advanced since 2003, she's gotten
steadily more network-centric and hardware-centric -- less pretty-girl
with acoustic guitar, way more techno DJ on the net.

Third, Cibelle does elaborate, artsy, even vaudeville-style
performances with lighting, props and costumes.  "You had to be there,"
and that's the point.   That's how you get people to pay to come in
the door.  Musicians can't sell music now; journalists can't sell
journalism.  So "events are the new magazines."  
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #140 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 04:57

    
Fourth, Cibelle has a cluster of allies who support her, and these
people are not musicians.  They're the "Abravanista" movement, based in
Sao Paulo.  Cibelle sometimes refers to herself as an "Abravanista
activist," and if you think of her as a Sao Paulo Abravanista
evangelist instead of some crooning diva with a guitar, all of a sudden
her seemingly scattered activities get a lot more coherent.  

The Abravanista people are difficult for me to describe.  I don't yet
understand them.  They're very Brazilian, and deeply into performance
art, video, painting, couture, and gay liberation.  Trying to sum them
up in a few words of American English is like trying to sum up the
Brazilian Tropicalia movement.  

You kinda know the Abravana crowd when you see them, because they're
long-haired big-city disco people with glitter clothes, neon and body
paint.  Yet they're  into a headspace that lacks a non-Brazilian
equivalent.

Interestingly, and maybe kind of synchronistically, the art term
"Abravana" comes from a famous young woman who was a  Patty Hearst
kidnapping figure in a huge Brazilian  political-violence scandal. 
Patricia Abravanel was dazed, and suffering Stockholm syndrome from her
week-long kidnapping ordeal, so after this colossal, televised fracas,
she cheerily told the media that nothing had threatened or scared her,
and that she felt great.  

So Abravana means, basically, "Fuck it."   It means, "no matter how
personally and politically awful this is, I won't allow myself to
engage with this and be traumatized."   So the Abravanista crowd are a
kind of "oh fuck off" counterculture who have gone into a vibrant,
post-traumatic creative scene.  It's this air of surreal nihilism that
puts some iron in their bones.  It's why I take them seriously and
consider them global-scale trend-setters as an art movement.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #141 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 05:02

    

I got interested in Cibelle, because she sings in English, and is big
on Twitter and seemed approachable and aware of her online fan base. 
She's easier to parse than most Brazilian artists.  So, nowadays, we do
 know one another, although we've never met.  I closely follow her
doings.  I do that mostly because, I must say, she cheers me up.   She
leads by example.

Americans, over our dual histories, have commonly looked on our
cousins the  Brazilians as a cheery, colorful, exotic and perky
society.   They're not, but that something that they offer us that we
Americans understand.  Can't be helped, there.  It's like Americans, a
historically fortunate society, being known worldwide for our moaning,
downtrodden blues music.

In point of fact, the Brazilians have an exceedingly dark history,
with every kind of marauding and torment and hunger and fearsome Third
World suffering.   Brazilian musicians in particular tend to get
harassed by the blinkered authorities.   Mellow, perky Brazilian
musicians have a mortality-rate like you wouldn't believe.  

I went to Sao Paulo and I asked around for Cibelle records.  They all
knew who she was, but they all assured me that Cibelle was much
better-known in London.  She's become a foreign-guy's pop star.  So,
wow, maybe I should go to Dalston in London to get the real deal? How
convenient.

I know that sounds ironic, but frankly, I admire that situation.  That
was a gutsy choice for her to make, as opposed to hanging out in the
neighborhood, trying to make the ultimate Brazilian Female Vocalist
National Vinyl LP.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #142 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 05:02

    

Fifth, (I'm still counting)  Cibelle has got a theorist angle. 
Cibelle hangs out with painters and installation people, and is
therefore keen on art manifestos.  I had only the vaguest idea what
"anthropophagy" and "Brazilian syncretism" were all about, but I
listened to thoughtful  people she was listening to, and, well, now I'm
starting to get it.  

Only a really, really big, young, multiracial, multiethnic country
like Brazil or the USA could get behind some anthropophagic syncretism.
  It's an alternative model for a global, rootless, massive culture. 
It's like magic-realist globalization.   I've never yet done any
anthropophagic Abravanista syncretism, but I'm pretty into Postmodern
subjectivity fragmentation.  Gimme enough cachaca and lime juice, and
hey, I might be able to hold my breath and get over there from here.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #143 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 05:07

    
As a sixth and final twist -- and it's something I can't resist -- 
Cibelle practices folk design-fiction.  In her performance alter-ego as
"Sonja Khalecallon," Cibelle creates elaborate fake video ads for fake
consumer products.  The "Anti-Skeptic Lotion," the "Fresh Eye-Drops,"
and the all-too-apt "Fuck-It Button," a wall-mounted device which
transforms you into an instant Abravanista.   

Cibelle also has a non-fake, genuine alliance with Melissa, a with-it
Brazilian shoe company that makes plastic designer shoes.

Popstars have been doing product-support for ages now.  The Spice
Girls were all over that, and Posh Spice in particular is moving into
couture retail, rather like Jade Jagger and Stella McCartney.  But
Cibelle is the first pop-star I've seen who has moved into that mode of
earning a living and just, well, syncretically cannibalized it.  

She's become a "multiartist" rather than a musician, mostly by soaking
up these various changes in culture and media and trying to personify
them.  She's like a sponge in a bucket-full of paints. 
 
She'll never be Lady Gaga, and M.I.A. is a lot  more politically edgy
if that's what you're looking for, but Cibelle, for me, is the
avant-garde.  Not in her music so much as her cultural activities, her
global position. 
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #144 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 05:08

    

So: you wanna know what a plausible pop-star looks like ten, fifteen
years from now?  She's very into performance, dress shoes and clothes. 
She's cloud-centric and globally mobile.  She comes from a social
movement rather than a recording label or a publishing house.  She's a
syncretic multi-artist model-actress web personality,  with a catchy
soundtrack.  Her fans are her participants.  And she's female, young,
and Brazilian.

That's the scenario.  And you know, it's not that bad.  It's okay. 
That somebody who personifies a culture we don't quite have yet.  It
could be a pretty good culture, if its activists know what they are
doing.

I look at Cibelle and I get the reassured feeling that I get from
Brian Eno.  It's not that I love everything that guy creates, or that I
embrace every idea among Eno's many skyrocketing ideas, but, y'know,
Brian Eno has fucking got it going on.  As a creative, you can see or
hear stuff that Brian Eno was doing thirty years ago, and you can
think, "Hey, that might work right now.  I should try that."    The
guy's lived example makes you want to get out of bed in the morning.

And if you keep getting out of bed, hey, you'll live long enough to
sum up another year.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #145 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 11 06:41

    
I just shared that essay with my fellow Plutopians... members of the
team at Plutopia Productions, http://plutopiaproductions.com, where I'm
Chief Digital Officer (a title we ran across that so fits my
predilections). 

A few posts back, Julian Bond commented on the accelerating future
(nodding to John Smart), the contraction of "now," singularity,
resource depletion, hitting a wall (actually, his metaphor was about
reaching the end of the runway)... the existential anxiety you feel
when you're MacGruber and you see the tock ticking down on the time
bomb in the vault of your experience. Plutopia emerged from my
conversations with Derek Woodgate (now Chief Creative Officer for
Plutopia Productions), from our various salons about culture and the
future and our thoughts about experimenting with the event form,
creating a new kind of event - what derek calls a "sense event." I say
a new kind of event - similar things are happening in Europe, events
like V2 and Crossing Borders and Ars Electronica are probably similar
to the kind of events we're assembling... your term "anthropophagic
syncretism" is probably an apt description for the kind of deeply
integrated technology-focused multicultural experiences we're creating.
(Just thought of Liza Sabater's - @blogdiva's - label "culture
kitchen" - maybe we're a cultural Kitchen Aid, real MixMasters.) In our
world the ticking time bomb is transformed into a metronome, every
tick a celebration of possibility; every end a new beginning, a kind of
radical optimism about human resilience and culture. Our next Plutopia
event (March 14 during SXSW Interactive in Austin,
http://plutopia.org) is themed "the future of play," a celebration of
*homo ludens,* an experiential ludic manifesto.

In the very worst of times, you can't break the cycle with despair.
The Abravanistas have it right: "she cheerily told the media that
nothing had threatened or scared her,
and that she felt great... fuck it!"
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #146 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 10 Jan 11 07:03

    
Cyber Yippies, woohoo!
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #147 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 08:04

    
http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2375444,00.asp

Lady Gaga, creative director at Polaroid and industrial design maven.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #148 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 08:08

    
*I just renewed my FlickR "Pro" account for another year.

*Last time, though, I renewed it for *two* years.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #149 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 11 08:08

    
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0A73IEtM5I

*Cibelle in Sao Paulo visually backed-up by the Abravanista clique.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #150 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 10 Jan 11 08:19

    
Hoping we get to talk about SXSW and Plutopia on Inkvue.well sometime
soon. Austin is one of the 'nodes' for creatives and it would be great
to have your inputs about what's happening and some historical
perspective as well.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #151 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 10 Jan 11 09:14

    
Reasonable reflections on Tucson, site wipings and Twitter Trigger
fingers...http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/09/us/politics/09bai.html?_r=2&hp
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #152 of 156: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 11 12:40

    
That Cibelle video is blasting in the background as I type this -
thanks, Bruce, if we could just run a set of closing titles over that
soundtrack, we'd have a very fine end to this year's State of the
World.

Thanks to all who commented here, via email, and on Facebook, and all
who posted pointers here and there so that we were less obscure than
usual. Thanks to Ted for his many comments, a kind of de facto
moderation of the generally immoderate conversation. Thanks to the WELL
for once again giving us a bonfire to rally around. (And to those of
you who asked "Is the WELL still around?" - yes, indeed, very much so,
despite the ongoing proliferation of social media platforms for
drive-by conversation. You can still get real sustained conversation
for a modest monthly fee at http://well.com.)

Obvious thanks to Cibelle Cavalli, the Abravanistas, and all
practitioners of anthropophagic syncretism wherever they may jam.

And speaking of SXSW and Plutopia, you'll find Bruce and I both there
- he's keynoting and I'm leading a panel of journalists talking about
news apps. And we'll be at Plutopia, playing. If you're into this
conversation you shouldn't miss SXSW, a veritable orgy of geek
schmoozing.

So long, until next year.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #153 of 156: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 10 Jan 11 13:07

    
Thanks for sharing, Jon and Bruce, and all who have posted and lurked.

Cibelle is fantastic, a real live Idoru.

One of the most favorite things I stumbled upon last year was a hacker
phrase:

AFK > IRL   (away from keyboard...in real life)

To which the response was: Everything is real life, dude!

May the Dude abideth with us all!
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #154 of 156: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 11 Jan 11 00:45

    
It was kind of people to put up with me -- yet again.

Drop by the blog, or the Twitter stream.  The ceaseless flow of
not-very-good but heavily-linked writing will continue!  @bruces

http://blog.wired.com/sterling
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #155 of 156: Gail (gail) Tue 11 Jan 11 12:32

    
Thanks, Bruce. You have me thinking on new tangents again this year,
and I love that.
  

inkwell.vue.400 : State of the World 2011: Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky
permalink #156 of 156: gmoke (gmokecamb) Tue 11 Jan 11 18:56

    
This anthropophagy idea has been around for more than 90 years. 

From _Tropical Truth: A Story of Music and Revolution in Brazil_ by
Caetano Veloso
NY: Alfred A Knopf, 2002
ISBN 0-375-40788-X

(155-156) Manifesto da poseia pau-brazil (Brazilwood Manifesto) of
1924 and Manifesto antropófago (Cannibal Manifesto) of 1928 [by Oswald
de Andrade]. These two texts of extraordinary beauty, both descended,
like the European manifestos, from Marinetti's Futurism, were a
rediscovery of and a new foundation for Brazil...

The second manifesto develops and exposes the metaphor of devouring.
We Brazilians should not imitate but rather devour new information from
wherever it comes.
  

