inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #0 of 196: Brady Lea (brady) Sat 4 Jan 14 20:19

    

It's time for the 2014 edition of the state of the world conversation with
Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky. The WELL has hosted this conversation
every year since 2000, ranging free through the worlds of technology,
design, politics, high and low culture, and fashion.

Bruce Sterling is a science fiction author, journalist, design theorist and
critic, and public speaker. Since he lives in Europe and travels the world
attending conferences and speaking, Bruce brings a high altitude broad
perspective to the table. Currently based in Serbia, he spends much of his
time on the road, and has a truly global perspective which you see in his
novels, nonfiction pieces, and his blog, "Beyond the Beyond." In addition to
his novels, Bruce has focused on the cutting edges of digital/hacker
culture, climate change, global politics, and contemporary design.  He
founded the Viridian Design movement, the Dead Media project, and is
currently fired up about the new aesthetic, augmented reality, and design
fiction.

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_sterling>

Jon Lebkowsky is a future-focused social polymath and lately skeptical
Internet maven. He's been a social commentator, gonzo futurist, media
analyst and critic, web consultant/developer, and online activist. He was a
cofounder of FringeWare, Inc., an early digital culture company/community,
and has worked with and written for bOING bOING, Mondo 2000, Whole Earth,
Plutopia Productions, Digital Convergence Initiative, Wireless Future, the
Society for Participatory Medicine, EFF and EFF-Austin, the WELL,
WorldChanging, SXSW, Social Web Strategies, et al. Lately he's part of a web
development cooperative, Polycot Associates, and cofounder (with Amber Case,
Tyger AC, and Patrick Lichty) of Reality Augmented Blog:

<http://www.realityaugmentedblog.com/>

<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #1 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 5 Jan 14 10:47

    
1993 was the birth of the mainstream Internet, with the arrival of the
Mosaic browser and the first steps toward privatization of the
backbone and a move away from the acceptable use policy that prohibited
commercial activity. Two decades later, in 2013, the Internet as we
knew it, a network of networks, is dead, replaced by a network that has
become the de facto platform for delivering media. Media is no longer
strictly professional, anyone can produce content of any kind, but the
culture of free is dying, and professional content production is
finding an audience again, and finding ways to extract payment for
access to established professional writers, musicians, videographers,
etc. At the same time, anybody anywhere can create content and drop it
into a more or less public channel. The volume of information, new and
replicated, is exploding.

Bruce made a related point last year, as he came up with the concept
of "stacks":

"In 2012 it made less and less sense to talk about 'the Internet,'
'the PC business,' 'telephones,' 'Silicon Valley,' or 'the media,' and
much more sense to just study Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and
Microsoft.  These big five American vertically organized silos are
re-making the world in their image. "

This is pretty well-established theology at this point, but I think
we're still in a transition with attendant confusion. These stacks and
related businesses are all about media and marketing, and they require
massive cycles of content, not so much as product but as fuel for the
engines of commerce. So the pipes are full of information, but it's
less reliable than ever - we're missing the intermediary vetting within
the cycle, everybody's running just to stay in the race. And where
media is amplified by a proliferation of content - channels and sources
- there's more room for media manipulation, political propaganda and
commercial marketing messages are embedded, often indistinguishably, in
the signal and the noise. 

Given all this, and implications that will emerge as we talk over the
next couple of weeks, I'd say the current state of the world is
*W*T*F*. 

Bruce, how's life across the pond?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #2 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 04:53

    
Well, it's 2014, and I thank goodness the WELL is still here.  I've
never been so happy to have an Internet account that doesn't belong to
some ultra-rich creep.

It'll be hard, this year, not to dwell obsessively on the capering
specters of the NSA, Snowden, Wikileaks, Bitcoin… 2013 turned out to be
the year when the Digital Revolution trended Stalinist.  Old-school
Digital Bolsheviks scattered hapless in every direction, as Big Data
Killer Bot Commissars scoured the darkening landscape, and Trotsky went
to ground in Ecuador.  

An extraordinary atmosphere of sullen, baffled evil, as the year
opens.  I don't know what to compare 2014 to --  except for many other
glum post-revolutionary situations, when the zealots succeeded in
toppling the status quo, then failed to install a just and decent form
of civil order.  The world in 2014 is like a globalized Twitter Egypt.

What's become of yesterday's august, sturdy, pre-digital institutions?
 For instance: why does the United States even have a Congress, in
2014?  Is it habit?  The Congress doesn't do anything now.  Everybody
despises them.  They despise themselves even more than the public does.
 

Of course it's easy and traditional for the American public to curse
the Congress, but they've never been this low in their own self-esteem.

Is it any wonder that the NSA took a page from Google, and started
throwing money in the direction of anything that even LOOKED like it
might be surveillance?  The NSA interpreted privacy as damage and
routed around it.  Why not give that a try?  The NSA has no effective
civilian oversight.  Whoever does?  

Suppose the entire US Congress came to your house in a body, to you,
as a citizen, and they told you, well,  anything at all -- in their
collective wisdom -- something minor maybe, say they recommended a
roach insecticide, for instance.  Would you take that act at face
value?   Would you listen to the Congress with the respect due legally
elected officials, and do what they said?

"Hey," you might say,  "the  US Congress is the legitimate, elective
legislative body of a superpower;  so they can't be that bad!  I'd
better buy that aerosol can and spritz it around some!"  Would you do
that?  Really?  Wouldn't you pull an NSA, and pretend to do it, and
then lie to them, lying as minimally as you could?   

After all, the NSA has got a job to do just like the rest of us, while
the Congress has spent entire years now trying to drown itself in a
bathtub.

Half the US population thinks the the US Congress is trying to murder
them with health care.  I guess that Congress Log is better than a
malignly active Congress Stork -- at least they're not impeaching
anybody now -- but it's  weird to see a legislative body with so little
self-confidence or sense of its own credibility.  They really seem
disrupted, irrelevant, in a hapless Gothic decline, as if the Congress
is eager to be unplugged and then replaced by some Silicon Valley
solutionist lobbyist market-for-votes.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #3 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 04:57

    
Before we start geeking out majorly on 2014's many scandalous
cyber-issues here -- and me especially, because, well, gee whiz --
let's have a brief review of the changes seen between the last WELL
State of the World, and this  new one for 2014.

Last year, I started by listing some more-or-random interest groups
who seemed to me to likely to have a rather good time in 2013.  I
figured these interest-groups looked perky and energetic, and maybe
they would prosper, or at least be fun to watch.  How'd they do?

  --->  "#1. The  3d printer guys.  Just so interesting!  Gotta love
them!" 

*Well, the 3D crowd did have a pretty good time of it in 2013.  Then
their little hobby markets started saturating, and also some cruel
patent-trolling broke out.  They're still doing okay, but the buzz of
2014 has moved to "wearables."  Whatever that is.  "Wearables" means
all kinds of stuff.  A 3DPrinter is a genuine, kind-of functional
machine, but a "wearable" is pretty vaporware, almost as vague as
"nanotechnology."

*When wearables arrive, I hope they're Italian.  If you've gotta wear
the damn things all the time, they ought to at least look elegant.


----> "#2.  Koreans.   2012 was all about K-pop and Samsung."  

*Samsung, a true industrial titan now. Tremendous year in 2013.  If I
was a K-pop guy, though, I'd be seriously upset about the North Korean
regime ruthlessly machine-gunning members of their own ruling family. 
I'm hard-put to imagine that ending well.  Kinda puts a pall on the
disco party there.


--->  "#3. Indians. Bollywood has long been a hobbyhorse of mine…"

*Man, did they ever cash in with Indian cinema in 2013.  Just maharaja
heaps of glittering rupees.  Unheard-of.  I dunno what they're gonna
do with all that wealth. I don't think they know, either.  They've
never had that much money in the "filmi" biz.  I'll keep watching.

----> "#4  Turks.  Sure, Turks are pretty miserable, but just look at
the truly awful state of everybody else around them!"  

*The awfulness around the Turks is still there, but then the Turkish
regime had to go buy and money-launder all that Iranian oil. Back to
the dark clouds of the Shadow State for dear old Turkey.  They've sure
got a lot of enemies, but they are their own worst foes.  Another
great, missed opportunity by a nation with a genius for missing them.

----> "#5.  China.  Yes, they're very big and powerful… everybody
around China is keenly resentful
of their island-snatching behavior…."

*Boy, I'll say.  In 2013, the Japanese premier went and stepped on the
live wire of Asian politics, twice.  Because he went to the local war
criminal cemetery, which, for 60 years, has been as bad PR-wise as the
Bridge on the River Kwai.  

*Yet everybody concerned -- Koreans, Taiwanese, Yankees, Vietnamese,
whoever -- after this ghastly affront, they were like: "Well, I reckon
he had to do that! Better scrape up some live debris from Fukushima,
and build some offensive warheads!  This is a new China, and we don't
like 'em at all.  Man up, Japanese guys!"

*Maybe it feels good to be aggressively Japanese, yet finally out of
the bad odor of World War II.  Much like their colleagues the moderns
Germans, those champions of free expression and stalwart enemies of
wiretapping.  Coolest guys around when it comes to modern freedom and
dignity, Germans.  They're kind of amazing.

*What the hell, nobody can remain the picture of evil forever. 
Especially with the Chinese doing their level best to grab the red-hot
crown of Sauron there.


----> "#6 Tea Party guys. Acidheads have had more coherent thinking
than these Creationist Randite gold-bar-eating pro-coal zillionaire
market fundie
people."  

*The Tea Party did okay in 2013.  I don't think they lost any votes. 
They're even a little more measurably Creationist than they were back
in January 2013.  They think they'll win the Presidency next time, but
after four years of their crazy obstinacy, what's left of American
governance?  If you think of the Tea Party as useful idiots for larger
forces that want to destroy the middle class and the nation-state,
they're a wonderfully successful group.  A thousand times more
effective than Occupy, for sure.

*The Tea Party gold-bug contingent lost a heap of money this year. 
The Tea Party preppers are starting to look like a dress-up fantasy
subculture of some kind, rather like steampunks.  Still, the Tea Party
at least gets the satisfaction of being mulish and spiteful, and that's
what they like best.


--->  "#7 Qataris.  The financiers of Al Jazeera, of the Arab Spring,
Egypt, Libya, Syria, etc etc." 

*Their Qatari zillionaire Renaissance went badly bust in Syria.  Back
to the drawing board.  If you can wipe the blood and nerve gas off a
drawing board, that is.


---->  "#8 Stacks.  In 2012 it made less and less sense to talk about
"the Internet," "the PC business," "telephones," "Silicon Valley," or
"the media," and much more sense to just study Google, Apple, Facebook,
Amazon and Microsoft."  

*It turned out the NSA was studying the Stacks better than anybody
else. In 2013, kindly, ultra-popular, liberating social media turned
into sinister surveillance marketing, almost overnight!  And there are
plenty more scandalous shoes to drop.  If "DropoutJeep" is inside the
iPhone, what's inside the Kindle, what's inside the Android?  What's
inside the PC, even?   "NSA Inside."

*The Stacks could have rallied and risen to this grave political
crisis, but they haven't.  They hunkered down, blinked at each other,
and muttered into their beer. It's like they all stared straight into
the five Portraits of Dorian Gray.  
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #4 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 04:58

    
Google was going wild in early 2013, they were like android demigods. 
Now Google is, all of a sudden, presto, Russia.  Google is a
surveillance secret-police empire with spy binoculars on their faces.
Sergey Brin's pet Moonshots are just a lame prestige show.  

It's sad, really.  Larry and Sergei used to be the Not-Evil Guys, they
empowered the users and won their instinctive trust.  Now, if Snowden
entered the boardroom of Google, Larry and Sergei would shriek in
falsetto like the Wicked Witches of the West and melt into two puddles
of black wax.

That doesn't make Microsoft, Apple, Facebook and Amazon any better
than Google -- Facebook in particular, oh my God -- but it's the first
time that these new titans of American industry have really looked
genuinely ugly.  Just, nasty. Because they're rich and powerful, but
they're also narcs.  They're creeps and snoops.  They're police
informants.

They were kinda tricked into it -- but everybody knows it, and their
unwillingness to face up the stark embarrassment is an act of tacit
consent. The Brazilians, Germans, French, Italians, Russians, the
Chinese ten times over, everybody, they all know.  It takes a while for
that kind of damage to the reputation to sink in, but it will.

They're not done, or anything -- the Stacks didn't get the witch-hunt
pitchfork, like Huawei did -- but they'll never again be the
fresh-faced cowboys of the Electronic Frontier.  They're cattle barons
now, and Silicon Valley stinks of their manure.  Gold rushes finish
ugly, in California.  

There's gonna be a way out of this -- before Apple showed up, in the
1950s and 1960s, the US population was terrified of "computers." 
Computers were considered inhuman, Orwellian instruments of folding,
spindling, and mutilation.  Computers have always had a dark side of
spying and encryption, ever since Alan Turing.  Geeks kind of like
spooks, actually, since they're both keen on obscure forms of technical
power.  But now we've got major-league geek spooks, and politicians
who roll over for 'em.  Not good. 

I'm guessing that some genius will find the reality-distortion field
and turn that around again, but not during 2014. We're in for a year
when the Global Village is Spook Country.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #5 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 05:00

    
I happen to be in Belgrade again -- I'll be here a few more days -- 
and things certainly have gone swimmingly for the current Serbian
government.  I don't know anyone anywhere who expected the "Radikalni"
to do so well, once in power.   Who would have thought that a political
party called "Radicals" would actually be radicals?

The Radikalni do genuinely radical things, by local standards. They
make people pay taxes.  They inspect  things.  They punish corruption. 
They negotiate with former enemies, sign treaties and build
infrastructure.  They feed the living and they bury the dead, and boy
do they ever win elections.  

I've never before been in a Serbia with an actual government running
it. I mean, Serbia is basically a small ethnic chunk from a
not-very-big failed state of the 1990s.  The region didn't much seem to
need a national government at all, as far as I could see.  

But the Radikalni are like some long-postponed 1989 new-broom thing
happening. They've become a newfangled national regime.  It's like they
know how to run a country, even.

It's not like the Radikalni are nice 89er hippie liberation guys or
anything, but I've never seen Serbia in such a state of public
contentment and apparent stability.  It's truly startling. 

This development gives me the conviction that pessimism is public
affairs is just a kind of arrogance.  It's just flat-out impossible to
know what people may be capable of, and even Mr Scrooge, that cramped
and miserable man who was one bent, splintered mass of crooked-timber,
can wake up one fine Christmas morning, mystically transformed into
whatever the hell Mr Scrooge was after that.

They may even join the EU, Serbia.  And then what?  I've always been
quite interested in Serbia, but now I'm interested in it for whole sets
of new reasons.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #6 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 6 Jan 14 05:48

    

On the ground in the USA, it's surprising how blasé (outside EFFish
geekdom) has been the response to NSA surveillance and new maps of the
panopticon, slightly revealed by Wikileaks and Edward Snowden. It's not
that we don't want or even expect privacy.  It's more like a state of
shock, the reality of growing persistent domestic surveillance is
somehow distant an unreal. It's like we're watching the Man from
U.N.C.L.E., the bad acts are bad video, some sort of fiction imposed by
deus ex Tom Clancy.  We have the same response to the careful
dismantling of government and whole sections of the former middle class
- it's a film by Frank Capra, or maybe Judd Apatow.  A cheesy bit of
cinema that will somehow resolve itself, credits will eventually roll,
we'll step out of the fantasy and into the light of day, and everything
will be fine, just fine. But what we're watching is not cinema, but a
maleficent YouTube video gone viral, shot by rabid weasels with an
infected Android, looping constantly like Einstein's definition of
insanity. We've dozed off watching it, fallen into nested dream states
fed by networks of fantasy, no clear way to consciousness.  

Another way to see it: slammed by a firehose of information, it's hard
to know anything, to be other than intellectually numb and detached
from any sense of broad existential danger.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #7 of 196: Brady Lea (brady) Mon 6 Jan 14 10:10

    

(A quick hello and thank you to you, Bruce & Jon, for doing this topic
again. And welcome, readers!)
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #8 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 11:01

    
*Oh, I don't worry about the alleged slow response.  Look what I was
saying twelve years ago.  Same social problem, just different brand
names and bandwidth speeds.

http://www.viridiandesign.org/notes/251-300/00283_geeks_and_spooks.html

*The NSA is older than the computer business.  It's older than I am,
even.  Espionage is the second-oldest profession.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #9 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 14 11:17

    
https://medium.com/@bruces

*I did some cyber-political writing in 2013.  I have the feeling that
I should do more of this, but I'm of two minds about it.  Political
causes I'm keen on don't generally thrive.  Why am I dabbling in this? 
Just because politics are bad?  They're always bad someplace.  

*I'm kind of in the mood to nick on back to Saint Petersburg and
interview Pussy Riot -- because, hey, my Slavic punk-rock spouse would
dearly love to go -- but is that stunt, even if doable, actually WORTH
IT??  Don't Masha and Nadya and the hard-bitten dudes from the "War
Group" have enough arty trouble already?  It's easy to turn on the
hot-water tap with a gesture like that, but, well….

*Also, despite my better impulses, I just can't get over feeling sorry
for the NSA.  I've run into NSA people on a number of occasions.  They
were always entirely polite and kind to me; I got the impression that
they somehow perceived me as one of their own.  They are my readers,
those high-IQ spook geeks, and well, I can sense this is a tragedy for
them.  It's worse for them, it's lots worse, than Assange was for the
US State Department.  

And what's next, for heaven's sake?  It's not like this process is
stopping.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #10 of 196: Eric Mankin (stet) Mon 6 Jan 14 11:50

    
Lot's to do in St. P. besides interview Pussy Riot. And the Baltic
states are a quick & fun drive south, full of interesting sociology.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #11 of 196: Roland Legrand (roland) Mon 6 Jan 14 12:12

    
Couldn't there be some cyberpunkish understanding of what the
NSA-spooks are doing? We're exponentially increasing the power of
individuals and small groups to do great things - we all have extremely
powerful computers in our pockets, the ability to tap into worldwide
communication networks, we can launch biotech labs at relatively little
cost, launch drones, engage in genetic engineering, and I guess soon
also run nanotech experiments. 
While all this can end up in useful or at least fun new products,
services and entertainment, it could also be used to commit acts of
mass-destruction. So the authorities realize that each and everyone of
us could do increasingly horrific things, and so the surveillance of
each and everyone of us seems logical. What follows is a depressing
competition of individuals, good and bad alike, to escape surveillance
using all those wonderful new toys (tor, bitcoin etc) and the state
trying to keep up, corrupting the venerable Stacks along the way. 
Of course it is shocking what Snowden and his friends expose, and how
the authorities in Western democracies organize a man hunt to stop the
leaks. But then again, at least as depressing is the realization that
mass-surveillance could be the logical outcome of our dream of the
ever-increasing empowerment of the individual. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #12 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Mon 6 Jan 14 12:37

    
the 'super empowered angry man' with a ghostbusters job.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #13 of 196: Gary Gach (ggg) Mon 6 Jan 14 12:45

    
Welcome back, Bruce. Maybe i the course of the conference we might
touch upon chasm (ever widening? ever thus?) within general InfoSphere.
 For instance, consider chemtrails ... & global warming.  At one end
of this spectrum, an irrational, if not incomprehensible scenario
(what? who? why?) of chemtrails, & at the other end the fairly
credible, yet likewise contested phenomenon of climate change. 

Maybe in the middle we might plunk Fukushima down on the table: 
    1) a threat to life as we know it on the west coast of North
America, of numerous orders of magnitude of danger, not being reported
(IE covered up) by mainstream media
    2) a magnet for sensationalism, bad data, & absurd conspiracy
claims

Without a circle of friends -- such as the Well -- trying to get a
handle on what's going on may be impossible for any individual who
wishes to dis-inter-mediate from official channels -- except for
trained researchers, journos, futurists, etc
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #14 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 6 Jan 14 14:37

    
We know too much (broadly) and we don't know enough (detail), and that
odd quirk of knowing invites us to speculate - about chemtrails, which
may be ordinary contrails but could also be a spew of unknown,
potentially sinister origin.  Or Fukushima: knowing that radioactive
water is flowing from that shattered facility, it's easy enough to
believe something like this:
http://www.snopes.com/photos/technology/fukushima.asp 

I tend to think the real threat to life as we know it is life as we
know it. Maybe we should find another way of knowing? That's something
a circle of friends could consider. Maybe we'll find something new.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #15 of 196: Morgan Rowe-Morris (rowemorris) Mon 6 Jan 14 14:45

    
I don't know that it requires a new way of knowing, but it's clear
that we're doing a really horrible job of educating on how to
discriminate between good data and bad. In a lot of ways that's the key
element of succesful research in the digital age.

For an example of someplace to start looking at the issues involved in
teaching the skills needed to deal with the issues arising from
overwhelming access to unfiltered and often unverifiable data check out
the ALA's digital citizenship project. 

http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/iftoolkits/litoolkit/informationliterac
y_digitalcitizenship
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #16 of 196: Eric Mankin (stet) Mon 6 Jan 14 17:13

    
What does seem to have become complicated in exploding terasets of
teradata is provenance. Lots of analyze, better and better tools to
analyze it, but it's all ones and zeros without tattoos or fingerprints
or backstory. And that's not even assuming someone is trying to
mislead.

Analysis has always been a huge challenge for even smart analysts. But
the provenance issue has previously been clearer. Now, more and more,
it's there. I know some people doing big data for science at least are
working on providing provenance. 

http://www.isi.edu/~gil/research/provenance.html

But it seems there's a lot to do. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #17 of 196: Worried Pig (oink) Mon 6 Jan 14 18:02

    
As we know, Der Spiegel released some notes taken from the NSA's
so-called Catalog of goodies. Here's a link to Jacob Applebaum's speech
which explains some of the inter relationships amongst Catalog items,
and puts them into context. It's chilling in places.

the transcriptors did a good job in that there are two versions of his
speech - a written transcript for the skim-readers, and the video
version for the full flavour, dark humour etc. (just over an hour)

http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2014/01/jacob-appelbaum-30c3-protect-infect-mil
itarization-internet-transcript.html
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #18 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 6 Jan 14 20:33

    
Re. surveillance, here's something from my 2013 top ten culture blasts
post (more at
http://weblogsky.com/2014/01/01/2013-top-ten-socialpoliticaltechnical-culture-
blasts/):

"In 2013 our level of trust was low and declining. We especially don’t
trust governments and corporations with our data because we’re so
increasingly aware of the potential for, if not the fact of, abuse. To
some extent concerns are legitimate, and to some extent they emerge
from a culture of paranoia that has evolved in the wake of mass media
and network technology, which have had several relevant effects:
greater awareness of abuses when they happen, feeding into myriad
fictional surveillance and pursuit fantasies, and more recently the
emergence of a social media panopticon. But the Snowden revelations
make paranoia feel pretty rational."

Andrew Leonard had a good Salon post on "How to defeat Big Brother"
(http://www.salon.com/2013/12/27/how_to_defeat_big_brother/):

"Edward Snowden, whether one considers him a traitor or a hero,
indisputably put the issue of government spying on the national table,
and provoked a conversation that seems likely to have real political
consequences. He used the technology available to him to turn the
camera back on the watchers. It’s a model we should be following in
every domain. Let’s turn a closer eye on our employers and our content
providers and our advertisers."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #19 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 14 03:40

    
This year, I happen to be the fiction editor for the 2014
all-science-fiction issue of MIT's  "Technology Review."

I've already lined up a cluster of my favorite fellow-travellers for
the effort, and I'm trying to encourage them to write some science
fiction stories that actually *review technology.*  

Just, like, a literary confrontation with the emergent techno
facts-on-the-ground -- and that's getting harder to do, I think.  It's
not because technology is moving faster, or that we're approaching a
Singularity or anything.   Mind you, that's an excellent sci-fi idea,
"Singularity," it was great of Vernor Vinge to come up with that
concept, everybody knows what it is now, the Singularity, even
long-haired duck hunters in backwoods Louisiana know what a Singularity
is.   It's cool and rare when science-fictional thinking becomes
genuinely popular.

But that's not why it's harder to write science fiction about
technology.   Technology's not moving all that fast in 2014; tech is
simply drifting toward the money, really.  It's hard  to write fiction
about technology because the structure of language is mutating.  Also,
the demographics for printed fiction have collapsed.  So, who is
science fiction talking to?  Why aren't those readers doing something
besides reading science fiction?

Writing popular science reportage is harder now, too,  in a  similar
way.  Who are you talking to, really?  How do you know the nature of
your audience, which is viral, on a network?  How can you frame
difficult, arcane matters in a clear way to these unknown, distant
people?  

And why is this news about science even "reporting" -- why aren't you
a blogger, or an activist, or an industry booster; why is this a
"science news story," why isn't it an app, or a Kickstarter?  Why is
this "journalism"?  Isn't journalism a weirdly old-fashioned, visibly
decaying thing to do nowadays, with businesses that can't support
themselves, with methods of production and methods of distribution that
are clearly dwindling away?  How can it be "news" when everything
supporting it is old and rotten?  Reading self-conscious contemporary
"journalism" is like listening to Woodie Guthrie singing to the
Wobblies off the caboose of a train.

Then there's that mutation problem, of literary language and the new
electronic vernaculars.  I consider this a major cultural difficult. 
For instance, nobody has ever invented a novelistic way to capture SMS
messages, which are the way real people basically talk nowadays.  We've
got dialogue conventions that work on a page, but we don't have any
SMS conventions.   They're inelegant.  The result is that literary
language loses vitality.   It's out of touch with the digital
vernacular of popular speech.  

Worse yet, that vernacular itself has become de-stabilized, so even if
you somehow create a situation were people do geekspeak at each other,
they're geekspeaking with the hardware and software of, say, 2009. 
When, oh my goodness, Snapchat was completely unheard of.

So fiction is losing its ability to marinate itself in the tenor of
the times, and to create a cultural sensibility, to be the credible
witness or social guide to "the way things are now."  "The way things
are now" are no longer what pages and paragraphs are about.  Literary
communication is a subset of communication, and communication is in
turmoil.

Science fiction is a literature about the way things *aren't,*  which
sounds ideal for the situation in some ways.  But science fiction
suffers in a society that scorns the authority of science, a society
with a weak, irrelevant realm of belles-lettres.  It's like being a
cutting-edge video artist when people are smashing vacuum-tube TVs with
hammers in the streets.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #20 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 14 03:41

    
So I'm doing my best to edit this  TECHNOLOGY REVIEW mag, and I'd even
like my fiction issue to be quite "state of the world" in approach; no
comforting adventure tales about marrying vampires, keen though we are
on that mythic prospect, in our modern day.  

However, I don't have a solution to the problem of the kind of science
fiction I'd like to see; if I did, I'd likely be writing it instead of
editing it.

Maybe somebody else has this figured out better than me.  Maybe you're
not a science fiction writer at all, maybe you're, like, eighteen or
something, so to you this is all stunningly obvious.  If so, I'd love
to publish your entirely up to date and relevant, clued-in story, or
"text," or whatever the fuck it is, and I'll give you a couple of
thousand dollars, too.  Because I've got an editorial budget; it's the
clue that I lack.

If people I've never heard refuse to send me what I need, then, well
I'll try to persuade some other people I already know to do it.  Or to
write, well, whatever,  For instance, I really wish I could publish a
Brian Aldiss story in TECHNOLOGY REVIEW.  Anything by him would do, I
guess.  He's 88 years old now, Brian, but in my opinion he's the
greatest science fiction critic ever.  

There were better critics who wrote about science fiction, but Brian
Aldiss is a science fiction practitioner who was able to see that
creative milieu from the inside out.  He understood it in a
sympathetic, intimate, yet clear-eyed and honest way.

There were some painful lessons for me in what Aldiss had to say about
science fiction; for instance, he once wrote that no science fiction
novel has ever been a great novel.  I was upset about that when I first
read it, as I naturally wanted to object, "Hey, wait a minute, what
about this awesome mind-bending space opera that I've already read five
times," but Aldiss was right.  

Science fiction novels aren't great novels, not because the writers
are no good, because science fiction novels don't do the right thing to
become great novels.   If Aldiss wasn't right, then you, the WELL
reader, wouldn't be here; you'd be off in a book-lined campus studio
listening to a seminar on the "State of World Literature 2014," and
you'd be thrilled by it, too, because that would be what culture was
about.

I can imagine a world where that would be true, but it sure isn't true
of this one.  Meanwhile, Brian doesn't read a lot of science fiction
at the age of 88; he reads Tolstoy.  Brian reads Tolstoy *critically,*
mind you, but he reads Tolstoy.   I totally get it about that.  I find
it comforting.   Maybe it has to be that way.   I'm a '77 punk-music
type, but I'm typing this while listening to Django Reinhart.  I can
listen to Django Reinhart for hours, nowadays.  I've got big digitized
iTune heaps of Monsieur Django, just plonking away on his timeless
standards.

http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/brian-aldiss-science-fiction-auth
or-review
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #21 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 07:49

    

* nobody has ever invented a novelistic way to capture SMS messages

That's like saying nobody's invented a novelistic way to capture
conversation - I don't think of SMS as special or radically new, just
another form of verbal communication.  I see it as asynchronous
telephony. I've read fiction that effectively incorporates SMS
messaging - e.g. Stephen King's _Doctor Sleep_, a recent popular
example. 

Seems to me that there's no dearth of good writing or interesting
ideas. I haven't read a lot of science fiction lately, but I hear that
the emerging SF authors eschew far future speculations and space opera,
and focus more on explorations of consciousness. Maybe you could look
for fiction about "consciousness technologies," a term Paco Nathan
used, and possibly coined,  in the early 90s.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #22 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 07:51

    
An aside about content...

There's confusion about writing and other forms of media, because with
social media public channels have emerged, proliferated, and filled
with blobs of content that, pre-Internet, were private or at least
contained within smaller circles of friends and acquaintances. 

Now there's a deluge of media, and our attention is challenged, where
do we focus, where do we find quality media? 

We still have professional writing and other media vetted by editors
or similar, maybe we call them content strategists, but the content
they oversee and distribute is mixed with (sometimes well done,
sometimes not) amateur media, cloaked marketing messages, and the
ineluctable cycles of noise. 

I find that, when I avoid social media (which is not often), my focus
improves; I feel less fragmented and "smarter."  As someone who has
evangelized for the Internet we have today, a proponent of social media
and freedom to connect, I'm finding the down side, and others are
finding it, too. I think that explains why professional media is
finding an audience again, even an audience that's willing to scale a
pay wall to get at content that's professionally produced.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #23 of 196: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 7 Jan 14 08:37

    
The recognition of a widespread need to/fear of unplugging seems like
the biggest cultural/technical change over my lifetime. 

Thinking about Django Reinhart reminds me that his music was radical
and not timeless when it was first played.  Earlier, edgy radical
artists organized "Societe Anonyme Cooperative des Artistes Peintres,
Sculpteurs, Graveurs" -- sounds like something contemporary except for
the graveurs -- and now impressionism is accessible, in some contexts
cliched and sentimental.    

For all these shocking punk-rebellion moments, in all those popular
forms, the emotional impact of the break from the past soon gets lost,
except as a footnote.  Art works can become timeless-feeling partly
because it's so easy to break history into a couple of simple chunks,
roughly "these days," "not so long ago," and the "timeless" past. 

Shakespeare's major works are great, but reading or staging them
requires a lot of footnotes, mostly about the language of the time. 
 
I think allowing for footnotes makes great speculative fiction work
that could endure and be accessible highly possible. If there is ever
consensus on what is great, that is.  Maybe -- I hope -- we are just
waiting for the great SF work to be written?  
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #24 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 08:52

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 7 Jan 14 08:53>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #25 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 08:54

    
Tweet from @soycamo: "people in the US are too impoverished and
overworked to care that they're being spied on..."
  
inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #26 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 09:35

    
<gail>, speaking of footnotes, we're planning a SXSW party (for EFF
and EFF-Austin) with a cyberpunk theme. Odd to think of cyberpunk as
retro. It's really about the 90s and the seminal moments in building
Internet 1.0, and the digital culture that formed at the core of the
network = the fringes of mainstream culture. We were just learning to
think with now-customary fragmentation of focus and attention, which I
think of as a potential evolutionary mutation - unless I'm in a funk,
then it's about devolving as a species. But who knows?

Shakespeare and later Django lived with a different configuration of
consciousness, most likely. I've always thought the evolution of the
human species has been more internal. If we do assume that the our
thinking and conscious experience is evolving and changing, I think it
follows that our interpretation of past culture might miss something.
(Then again, perhaps history and culture stabilize evolution, and we
change less than we might otherwise, because we carry context forward.)
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #27 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 14 10:28

    
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2014/01/how-the-us-almost-killed-the-internet
/all/

*Those are some illustrations in this Steven Levy article, folks.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #28 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 10:44

    
From that article: "In a sense, the tech companies are more like the
NSA than they would like to think. Both have seized on the progress in
computing, communications, and storage to advance their respective
missions. (When you think of it, Google’s original mission
statement—'to collect and organize the world’s information'—might also
apply to the activity at Fort Meade.) Both have sought to fulfill those
missions by amassing huge troves of personal information—and both
offer trade-offs that seemingly justify the practice. Google, Facebook,
and others argue that they can use that information to improve the
lives of their customers far in excess of any discomfort that may come
from sharing that data."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #29 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 14 10:54

    
Link via @omarg. Bedtime in the Internet of Things:

http://www.engadget.com/2014/01/07/sleep-number-x12-bed/?ncid=rss_truncated

"Sleep Number just announced the x12, which packs a variety of sensors
to monitor your sleeping habits, movement, heart rate and breathing
rate. Basically, then, it potentially eliminates the need for a
wearable fitness tracker, assuming you can do without the activity
monitoring. In particular, the bed has two sections, each of which are
independently adjustable, so that once the bed knows your sleeping
patterns, it can suggest ways you might want to change, say, the head
incline. Additionally -- and this is perhaps our favorite feature -- a
Partner Snore feature allows you raise your partner's headrest to help
ease snoring. (Because anything that introduces passive-aggression to
domestic relationships wins our vote.)"
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #30 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 14 10:57

    
*If things weren't bad enough between the NSA and Silicon Valley, now
they've got a Californian water war on their hands.  Maybe they can
retaliate by briskly shutting California's gas pipelines, like Enron
used to do in their heyday.  That'll teach those Stacks:  no fossils,
no cloud, you rascals.

http://talkingpointsmemo.com/muckraker/nsa-nullification-california
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #31 of 196: a plaid pajama ninja (cynsa) Tue 7 Jan 14 22:02

    
(what brady said: thanks for doing this again, guys.)

you're making me want to move to Serbia, bruce.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #32 of 196: Brady Lea (brady) Tue 7 Jan 14 22:09

    

nice:

<http://blog.sfgate.com/morford/2014/01/07/five-companies-to-fear-fondly/>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #33 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 14 23:59

    

Gail Williams (gail) "Thinking about Django Reinhart reminds me that
his music was radical and not timeless when it was first played."

*I'd agree that the idea of a French gypsy as a maestro of American
Jazz was pretty radical in Django's day.  Likely that seemed rather
threatening to the great and the good, at the time.  But Django
Reinhart is classic now. Nobody can ever be "classic" except in some
"now."  

*Some artist's "nows" are longer than the nows of other artists.

*Tolstoy was a radical Christian Socialist.  His own wife was
freaked-out by his political eccentricities. Tolstoy is classic now,
though.  I'm not sure that we have any other way to get our "classics."

*Our true, no-kidding "classics" are supposed to be from genuinely
remote, ancient times, like the Latin or Greek "classics."  But the
creatives who were making up that stuff back in the ancient, classical
world, they never walked around in their togas in real-time, being all
self-consciously "classical."  

*Ovid, for instance.  Ovid was banished from Rome by Augustus Caesar
-- because of some obscure, yet obviously awful, imperial sex scandal.
I don't know what sleazy mischief that poet Ovid was up to, but it was
so transgressively unbearable that Ovid was banished to a dismal
barbarian village -- a place that's downstream from my current
residence here.  

*I can scarcely stroll out of my apartment, and go to gaze upon the
misty, wintry Danube  (which is a good-sized river by European
standards, and it's quite pretty, too, just check my FlickR set)
without feeling an obscure yet genuine pang about Mr. Ovid.  Having
read some Ovid, I often think about him -- even though Ovid is merely a
dusty, lifeless Roman imperial apparatchik that nobody reads in his
own language nowadays.  

*Could Ovid, in his real life,  possibly have been such an actively
dangerous, busybody little sleazebag nuisance that he really *deserved*
to end up in Bulgaria?

*Ovid is a pretty good writer, and being a writer myself, I'd love to
defend a fellow writer unconditionally.  But -- (let's at least admit
this possibility) -- maybe Ovid really WAS that bad, as a Roman
citizen.  Maybe the classical Ovid wasn't just "radical," but much too
radical.  Ovid somehow placed his sandaled foot on the (as yet
nonexistent) electrified third rail of Roman Imperial politics.  Ovid
got thrown out of town, to the distant rim of the Empire; nobody ever
let him back in.

*It's not implausible to wonder if the classical "intelligence
community" was involved in the dire fate of Ovid.  His fate was
obscure, and maybe that obscurity was deliberate.  Any court with court
poets is bound to have some court spies.  The Emperor Augustus was a
busy man.  The autocrat needed his spies.  

*Somebody -- some unknown but very real person -- had to go inform
Augustus Caesar about Ovid, and Ovid's misbehaviors.  "Listen, Your
Wonderfulness: we've been following this Ovid guy around, while
undercover in our togas.  He's a close friend and media confidante of
this rotten, decadent playboy who's in bed with your out-of-control,
bad-girl daughter, Julia."  That obscure whisper would have pretty well
done it for the author of the METAMORPHOSIS.  Ovid would have been
ancient, Roman, a classic poet -- and toast.

*And that story is why I don't expect the readers of the WELL here to
rush out in a body and abolish espionage.  I also don't expect you to
rise up in your righteous wrath and abolish prostitution, narcotics,
and ancient, classical religions that you may not currently approve of,
like, say, Christianity.  Call me a pessimist if you will, call me a
cynic. I know how to watch a calendar. Pessimism and cynicism aren't
the problems at hand in these matters.

*The problem of espionage is inherently political.  It's a power
relationship.  If I spy on you, and you know it, that's a virtue, it's
"transparency." When you spy on me, and I don't know it, that's a vice,
it's "surveillance."  

*As mediation evolves into ubiquity, mediation becomes more political:
who writes the checkboxes, and who is forced to click on them.  Since
we live in a digital world, you and I both know that it's not "law,"
it's mere "shrinkwrap."  Shrinkwrap is a mockup, it's a prototype, it's
in permanent beta, you don't care, and neither do I.  Until we have to
care, because of some political train-wreck, and then the rampant
lawlessness of shrinkwrap looks pretty awful.

*There's no click box to let Snowden leave Moscow.  There's no click
box to let Assange leave the embassy of Ecuador.  You can't hit a
RETURN key to let Barrett Brown out of custody in Texas. You can't
click a box to grant amnesty to that ex-military gay guy who likes to
change his name so as to spite his jailers. 

*They are some very digital people indeed, but they are at one with
the classic Mr Ovid exiled in Bulgaria, these four guys.  I can't doubt
they'd have a lot to discuss, if they could escape their fetters, and
gather in one spot in space and time.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #34 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 14 00:07

    
*"Use this new technology."  "Oh please, no, I can't do that, because
it's just so geeky and ugly."  I've seen that struggle happen so many
times. Generations of it, even.  There's something voyeuristically
fascinating about it, it's like watching some very halting and clumsy
marriage-courting ritual.

*Now it's "wearables."  She's entirely right of course, they do look
like crap.  But mobile phones used to be uglier than sin, and I bet if
she lost her current mobile in the subway, she could cry.


http://www.elle.com/news/fashion-style/where-is-the-wearable-tech-we-want-to-w
ear

"I get why the Fuelband is cool. I get why it’s important and what it
does. I just don’t want to wear it. It’s like wearing sneakers on the
subway and changing into heels when you get to the office. I get the
point of it. It just kills my vibe.

"I can’t imagine using any of these items—mostly because they’re techy
looking, and not in that sleek, sexy way, but more in a masculine,
rubbery, will-ruin-my-outfit way."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #35 of 196: Alan L. Chamberlain (axon) Wed 8 Jan 14 01:15

    
>we're planning a SXSW party (for EFF and EFF-Austin) with a 
>cyberpunk theme. Odd to think of cyberpunk as retro.

You simply must book Billy Idol.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #36 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 14 04:02

    

"a plaid pajama ninja (cynsa):  you're making me want to move to
Serbia, bruce."

*Well, don't arrive here in your plaid pajamas.

*It's true that it thrills me to see this new Serbia that's rather
like its obscure cousins Slovenia or Slovakia; just another weird,
harmless place with a vowel shortage.  

*It seems to me that positive aspects of their national culture are
coming to the fore these days, that their troubles have long repressed.
 They're more creative now, more expressive, less of an armed camp,
more alive to their own possibilities.  There are events and situations
in Serbia now, like say the Exit Music Festival, or Resonate, or
Share, where one can have a pretty good time in Serbia, and even learn
something new that's worth knowing.

*Still, despite increasing and diligent effort, they don't really have
a tourist industry in Serbia.  It's not yet a sleek and seamless place
to visit.

*The coast of Croatia, any foreigner can manage pretty well; Croatia
has about the same level of material culture as Mexican coastal
resorts.  Croatia's full of tourism professionals who will sell your
kids ice cream from carts in the summer.  Serbia, not so much; they
don't go out of their way to parodize themselves for foreigners, like,
say, my home town of Austin, Texas does on Sixth Street.  

*So, if you show up here in Serbia, they feed you, but they just feed
you what they themselves eat.  You have to sleep in their hotels, use
their own rattletrap buses and taxis, scratch your head over the
relative material deprivation in their shops, etc.   Belgrade is still
an authentic place with its own regional food and music.  If you go
into a cafe, nobody speaks English.  The radio is full of pop hits
rooted in local folk traditions. The newspapers and magazines are
obsessed with the doings of celebrities nobody else has ever heard of.

*In 2014, things are much, much better here, just better by pretty
much any objective standard, but the Balkans have always been poor. 
There have been some occasional rich people around here, moguls,
princes, warlords and so forth, but it was never a prosperous society. 
The Balkans is an ancient region that's been through slavery, and
peasantry, and Communism, with occasional outbreaks of slaughter to
vary the pace.  

*It's just a harsh, rugged part of our world, and although it's
looking pretty good nowadays, quite upbeat even, a marvel of
improvement to tell the truth, you're not going to see a lot of
European Union people lining up for a residency in Serbia.  While the
opposite: Serbs aspiring to live in Europe, or Canada, the US or
Australia -- well, there's nothing more common.  My fondness for their
eccentric and colorful habits doesn't restrain them from getting out
when as they can.  One should trust their judgement there.  When people
vote with their feet, they're sincere about that.

*My guess is that it's the diaspora Serbs who are really changing
Serbia, in this decade.  I don't know quite how that works out, because
the Radikalni are intensely patriotic politicians, they cling fiercely
to symbols of state, church, land and people, they're all about the
braided leather shoes and the hats of extinct river pirates.  But they
just don't act like hicks, any more.  It's because they don't think
like hicks, I guess; they don't remember how. 

*It's hard to say what they do act like, right now.  Like the canny
operatives of some small, regional, European nation-state, I guess. 
They seem to have figured out the nation-state, at about the same time
that everybody else realized that nation-states are almost useless.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #37 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 14 08:23

    

In these annual conversations, we focus on surfaces and seldom discuss
the inner worlds of "three-brained beings," as Georges Gurdjieff
referred to humans. I wonder how our minds are changing as we're
conditioned to think in 140-character bursts of information. What's the
impact of focusing on screens of data as persistently as many of us
do? In the past I argued that those screens are windows on the world,
but windows are analog, constrained, persistent. Through our screens
we're receiving digital signals at an increasingly high rate of speed,
and there's a hypnotic quality to the flow of light, color, and data.

We see details of the lives of our friends and acquaintances in an
attention-challenging stream of Twitter, Facebook, and Tumblr posts,
Instagram images, short-burst Vine videos. I just hopped over to
Facebook, thinking to look for examples. I found a post from Howard
Rheingold, an image of Howard with Wavy Gravy, with a long thread of
responses in which he mentioned his trip to Austin with Mr. Gravy back
in the 90s, and I posted a couple of memories of that trip. Then I saw
that Jean Russell mentioned Facebook's "other" inbox, and I couldn't
resist checking it out. There were two Nigerian spam messages offering
to connect me with large sums of money, which I quickly learned to
report as abuse, and a message from a former high school friend I
hadn't seen in something like 45 years. I posted a note back to him.
Then I saw that my friend Tiffany posted a song sung before lunch at
her son's preschool:

Give thanks to the mother earth
Give thanks to the father sun
Give thanks to the plants in the garden
where the mother and the father are one.
Blessings on our meal.

Our song at the end of the day:

I open my eyes to you
I open my heart to you
Together we reach our arms to the sun
and together we are opening our loving hearts
as one.
Thank you for a beautiful day.

Below that, Pat Lichty had posted a photo of Chicago under ice, pretty
surreal, and Mark Frauenfelder posted a link to a medium.com piece,
"Explain Bitcoin Like I'm Five." I resisted the urge to follow that
link, but if I had followed it, I suspect I would have read the first
two paragraphs, saved it, and never looked at it again.

Another friend posts that she's awake again in the middle of the
night, another about "a friend's amazing long term partnership" and
whether it's better to be single. Under that there's a Harry Knowles
defense of Michael Bay's CES bounce, and John Shirley's posted a link
to a Slate post about growing up unvaccinated (in which the author says
"As healthy as my lifestyle seemed, I contracted measles, mumps,
rubella, a type of viral meningitis, scarlatina, whooping cough, yearly
tonsillitis, and chickenpox."

Surfing social media like this is seductive. It's worthwhile to watch
yourself while you're doing it: see how the gears shift, see how the
attention is conditioned to ebb and flow. Recently concerned that this
surfing activity was creating a worse than usual attention deficit in
my flow of consciousness, I decided focus where sustained attention is
required, e.g. reading books, or building things. Many years of
meditation have already shown me how hyper the monkeys in my head can
be, and how difficult to tame, yet despite that awareness, despite
regular dedicated attempts at focused attention, I was undermining any
potential mindfulness and focus as I was bouncing around Facebook,
Twitter, and other online information streams. We all have different
selves, different "I's" inside our heads. Part of me wanted focus and
consistency, another part wanted to drink from the firehose.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #38 of 196: david gault (dgault) Wed 8 Jan 14 08:36

    

Just wanted to quickly point out that while Congress 
is as unpopular among the polled as has been noted
here, Congress is very popular with its owners.  
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #39 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 14 10:29

    
In case you're wondering who those owners are, here's a 2010 overview
from Mother Jones:
http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2010/09/capitol-hill-top-corporate-sponsor
s
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #40 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 14 10:48

    
The state of the world could shift abruptly and catastrophically if a
large asteroid struck the earth. Last year a relatively small asteroid
struck earth's atmosphere above Russia:
http://neo.jpl.nasa.gov/news/fireball_130301.html. It caused
significant injuries and damage:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chelyabinsk_meteor.

Good to know that somebody's paying attention:
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/space/10558514/Nasa-spacecraft-spots-potent
ially-hazardous-new-asteroid.html
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #41 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 14 13:22

    
*Looks like I just got a full complement of contributors for
TECHNOLOGY REVIEW.  Tragically, none of them are eighteen.  Maybe one
or two will be struck by an asteroid and I'll be back at the last
minute begging for genius again.

*I've seen some YouTube compilations of people's reactions at
Chelyabinsk, by the way.  It's really frightening and pitiful to be
assaulted in that way -- by some grave danger that is utterly random,
out of the sky.  Worse than an earthquake, really.  It's easy to joke
about something as weird as being killed by an asteroid, but I felt
true sorrow for those people.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #42 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 14 13:25

    
*Here's a nice map of people trying to own Congress.  They don't
strike me as a happy, satisfied bunch of guys.  More like haunted
figures pulling levers at the Sheldon Adelson casino.

http://brucesterling.tumblr.com/post/71963060721/non-americans-should-get-hip-
to-this-useful
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #43 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 14 14:10

    <scribbled by jonl Wed 8 Jan 14 17:25>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #44 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 14 17:30

    
I believe Colorado's going to shift from Financial sector
contributions to Agriculture...
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #45 of 196: Matthew McClure (mmc) Wed 8 Jan 14 19:59

    
Fukushima strikes me as an important event of 2013, one whose impact
on the future is likely to be significant, and one whose uncertainty
casts a broad pall.

But it prompted Safecast, too (http://www.safecast.org, a global
sensor network for collecting and sharing radiation measurements to
empower people with data about their environments). People like Joichi
Ito and Ray Ozzie got together and came up with a clever way to croud
source Big Data to provide reality-based information, as opposed to
Jon's Snopes hoax. They've aggregated tens of millions of radiation
readings around the world (including Antarctica recently - so all seven
continents now).

Mind you, any amount of radiation is harmful to human health and the
story's not over yet, but at least we have a way of knowing what's
real, which seems increasingly difficult these days.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #46 of 196: Matthew McClure (mmc) Wed 8 Jan 14 20:04

    
(Yes, I know Fukushima happened in 2011, but its impact was still
significant in 2013. And I meant crowd sourcing, not croud sourcing.)
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #47 of 196: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Wed 8 Jan 14 21:16

    
From an off-WELL reader:

Hi Jon and Bruce,

Long time lurker, first time poster:

It occurs to me that Bitcoin may be much more than just a great way to
buy drugs online. As software eats industries and robots eat jobs, the
rise of a currency that requires no centralized control seems to
represent an existential threat to the nation-state itself. How are we
doing at acknowledging and handling that, both here in the States and
abroad? Managing currencies are kind of the de facto power of a
late-Capitalist nation, so how do we plan to keep relevant when the
nation-state itself gets crammed through the "digitizer" (see Bruce's
health care screed  a few years back), and how do we influence the way
it comes out on the other side?

Thanks as always for doing this, guys. It's an annual tradition I
always look forward to!

-Toby
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #48 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 14 05:39

    
*Hmmm.  One doesn't normally see Cory Doctorow writhing around
sleepless and predicting doom.

http://mostlysignssomeportents.tumblr.com/post/72759474218/we-are-huxleying-ou
rselves-into-the-full-orwell

*I'm not entirely upset about "losing the web," having already lost
bulletin-board systems and the Information Superhighway.  Losing the
"personal computer" is gonna feel like a weird one, but I was alive
before the PC existed and I have an intuition I'll outlive it.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #49 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 14 05:44

    
I'm trying to think of something witty to say about Colorado
marijuana, without moaning for the awful fate of the armies of
prisoners, and the cruel decades of repression and criminality.

*Maybe "sushi pairings" are somehow funny.  I mean, the ideas of
aesthetes in a mountain state eating Japanese raw seafood as they puff
exotic brands of semilegal narcotic.  Probably the Emperor Nero would
have found that genuinely amusing.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #50 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 14 05:52

    
http://www.newyorker.com/arts/critics/atlarge/2014/01/13/140113crat_atlarge_mo
rozov

*When is Evgeny Morozov finally gonna wise up and realize that it was
really the WELL that caused all this stuff that he decries in the New
Yorker here?  Boy, what a scolding he's gonna give us.

*I'd like to take personal credit for destroying Ruskin's Arts and
Crafts Movement, but unfortunately the dates are wrong.  Stewart Brand
though, wow. Somebody they'll figure out that Stewart invented
chemtrails.

*It's got to be him, am I right?  Look at the mountains of evidence!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #51 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 06:00

    
(Bruce's last couple of posts slipped in while I was writing this
response re currency...)

Some of my colleagues have organized a conference on alternative or
evolutionary economies January 25 here in Austin: http://nextecon.org/
Just yesterday I was in a discussion of virtual currencies, which
included a discussion whether Bitcoin is more aligned with existing
approaches to currency, and how you could create a new form of currency
as an emerging technology that is smarter about building and
leveraging networks of trust and stable exchange. This isn't really my
are of ongoing focus; perhaps Bruce will have more to say about it. I
do know that effective economies are build on trust, and we have little
of that in today's world. An evolution of new economic approaches
seems unavoidable but fraught with difficulty. Global economic
structures carry the substantial weight of history and human
experience, you can't shatter and replace exiting currencies overnight,
however smart a virtual approach might seem. On the other hand, I hear
that our traditional approaches have brought us to the brink of global
economic disaster, and we're precariously balanced there, hoping the
winds of speculation, corruption, and uncertainty won't blow us over. 

Reference on "community currencies":
http://www.appropedia.org/Community_Currencies

Reference on Open Source Currency: http://blog.opensourcecurrency.org/

Tom Brown's Github: https://github.com/herestomwiththeweather (Tom has
done a lot of development in support of open exchange and currency.) 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #52 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 06:08

    
Bruce, in that post you linked, Cory said "I can’t shake the feeling
that 2014 is the year we lose the Web." Which makes me think he's
resisting the thought. I accepted the death of the Internet here in my
annual "top ten whatever" post:
http://weblogsky.com/2014/01/01/2013-top-ten-socialpoliticaltechnical-culture-
blasts/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #53 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 06:46

    
Important for geeks: the state of software as we begin 2014, via Tim
Bray of Google (an old hand at net-targeted development):
https://www.tbray.org/ongoing/When/201x/2014/01/01/Software-in-2014

"Our tools are good, our server developers are happy, but when it
comes to building client-side software, we really don’t know where
we’re going or how to get there."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #54 of 196: david gault (dgault) Thu 9 Jan 14 06:57

    

Thanks for the link to the Doctorow piece.  It's dated today,
on my browser.  I hadn't thought that through, about HTML5.  
A simple search on "html5 drm" returns lots of scary stuff.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #55 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 14 08:11

    
*The shiny new wearable "Wellograph," tragically, doesn't access the
WELL.

http://www.wellograph.com
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #56 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 9 Jan 14 08:15

    
we should not be surprised when we learn there's a backdoor on the
thermostatically warmed toilet seats.  Bitcoin could have been conceived as
a hacker project to discover new prime numbers by paying a reward to those
who succeed, not just a way to sell the mining machines.  who's making the
makers?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #57 of 196: Paul Raven (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 08:49

    
Comment from Paul Raven emailed yesterday:

Hi, Bruce & Jon; always good to watch over your shoulders as you do
the yearly de-dung of the Augean stables.

Re: SMS, emails and similar in novelistic writing: definitely a few
examples (Jeff Noon's _Nymphomation_ leaps out, because a) it was
before workaday email access was common for average Brits, and b)
because he nailed the high-bandwidth potental of acronyms,
double-meanings and personal subtexts... albeit for the sake of a
slightly cheesy plot-point, IIRC). But I think the reason you don't see
much of it is because the audience for novels (mostly) doesn't live
very deeply in the networked world. I suspect this will change, but the
novel will change into something else at the same time. It may already
be. Tim Maughan's _Paintwork_ and his stories for ARC deal well with
the *feel* of networked conversation without going overboard on trying
to replicate the *look* of it; whether that's enough to reach those for
whom the network is mundane remains to be seen, but I don't know many
people who're grappling quite so hard with trying to bring the life of
the networked underclass to life on the page. (Full disclosure: Tim's a
friend. I hang out with him in hope some of his writing mojo rubs
off.)

> I find that, when I avoid social media (which is not often), 
> my focus improves; I feel less fragmented and "smarter."  As 
> someone who has evangelized for the Internet we have today, 
> a proponent of social media and freedom to connect, I'm 
> finding the down side, and others are finding it, too.

The wave looks different if you're surfing the tube to how it looks
from the beach it's rushing toward, or from a patched fishing smack a
few miles out to sea. (Or, one presumes, from the periscope of your
custom-built cartel narco-sub, or the helipad of your secessionist
transhumanist sea-stead enclave.) The knack appears to be working out
where best to see whatever the hell it is you think you need to see.
Though working out what you need to see is no mean feat, either...
where's my minority report?

And please allow me to second (third?) the vote for the appeal of the
Balkans as described; as the UK rushes headlong to embrace its
increasing economic and political irrelevance, it's nice to know
there's maybe somewhere to run to. Our Glorious Leaders are gearing up
to celebrate the glorious noble sacrifice of WW1 while talking about
sealing the borders and demonising anyone unBritish (whatever that
means); meanwhile the Germans, economic handwringing notwithstanding,
actually remember what the wars were fought *for*. So the former home
of the Stasi gets angry abut wiretapping, while the Land of Dopes and
Tories tells its citizens to suck it up and get back to work at their
zero-hour-contract place of employment. Or else.

History's a feast if you like the bitter taste of irony, no?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #58 of 196: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Thu 9 Jan 14 08:57

    
@bruces 48: I don't mean "lose the Web" as in "lose it as a fun place to
hang out" or "lose it as a popular medium" -- I mean "lose it because it
will become a trojan horse to smuggle malware into the computers we live
inside of and that live inside of our bodies."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #59 of 196: david gault (dgault) Thu 9 Jan 14 09:12

    

Funny how 'Balkans' keeps popping up.  I never 
bothered much with learning HTML because there were
so many dev tools, so many competing religions on
which was true. HTML5 was sold to me as the standard 
that was to unite the fractured principalities.  
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #60 of 196: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 9 Jan 14 09:31

    
here's alex payne's take on bitcoin

https://al3x.net/2013/12/18/bitcoin.html


(ducking)
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #61 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 10:58

    
Thanks for posting that, Paulina. My summary of my take on Payne's
piece: Bitcoin is an experiment, not a solution.

I liked this: "...in a time of growing inequality, we need technology
that preserves and renews the civilization we already have. The first
step in this direction is for technologists to engage with the
experiences and struggles of those outside their industry and
community. There’s a big, wide, increasingly poor world out there, and
it doesn’t need 99% of what Silicon Valley is selling."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #62 of 196: Morgan Rowe-Morris (rowemorris) Thu 9 Jan 14 11:17

    
At this point is there even any allegation that Silicon Valley wants
to be part of the solution? I know that in the early days of the
internet there was a belief that the nature of the internet would
eventually lead to radical social change, but at this point it's surely
just another corporate playground. 

That's not to say that there aren't some interesting technological
solutions out there, but they seem to have increasingly little to do
with the internet or the big tech companies. 

One Laptop might be a good solution at some point, and Brazil might
still be able to exert some leverage on the international system. The
Obama administration's first steps on increasing open access to
federally funded research might also be a big deal at some point. 

Can anyone think of a tech story from 2013 where Silicon Valley was
the hero rather than the villain or the accomplice?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #63 of 196: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 9 Jan 14 12:18

    
Belatedly, happy new year JonL and Bruce. Glad to be present for this
latest State of the World, on--yes--our still-here, iota-sized internet
space not owned by some rich creep.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #64 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Thu 9 Jan 14 12:26

    
"the Llewin Davis of social networks"

I saw an interview with the Reddit founder this week on Charlie Rose.  He
said the idea was to find something to work on that let him feel like he was
still in college, not some corporate behemoth.  Conde Nast now owns Reddit.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #65 of 196: A Manic Android (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 14 16:14

    
Via email from "A Manic Android":

Regarding bill braasch (bbraasch) in permalink 56
"Bitcoin could have been conceived as a hacker project to discover new
prime numbers"

One of the altcoins was conceived to do exactly that:
http://primecoin.org/static/primecoin-paper.pdf

Abstract
A new type of proof-of-work based on searching for prime numbers is
introduced in peer-to-peer cryptocurrency designs. Three types of prime
chains known as Cunningham chain of first kind, Cunningham chain of
second kind and bi-twin chain are qualified as proof-of-work...

Basically, Bitcoin is Alt-currency 1.0 and is actually a protocol.
Imagine trying to discuss HTTP in 1985 and that's what discussing
Bitcoin is like currently. There are currently 100s of other protocols
and most are basically Bitcoin clones but with the right mathematical
question, one could harness computers around the world to do research.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #66 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 14 03:45

    
Cory Doctorow:  I don't mean "lose the Web" as in "lose it as a fun
place to hang out" or "lose it as a popular medium" -- I mean "lose it
because it will become a trojan horse to smuggle malware into the
computers we live inside of and that live inside of our bodies."

*Sure, Cory, "Time for some traffic problems in Fort Lee," as they
like to say in New Jersey.

*I don't want to muddy the waters here, when what really worries Cory
is Netflix apparently winning a round in the global
intellectual-property wars. But the Internet has ALWAYS, ALWAYS had a
trojan horse. The horse was a big nuclear submarine with uniformed guys
inside it, dragging up cables from the ocean-floor and tapping them.  

*There was always surreptitious surveillance: really big, fancy,
well-financed wooden horses with  armies of geeks hidden inside.  Not
just one such army, lots; other countries spy too.  Always there.

*The net's crypto standards have always been artificially weak.  Weak
code can't mean the *end* of the Internet world by itself -- because
that situation was present *before* was the Internet was ever thought
up.  

*You can say that the Internet's governance problems are showing some
potentially fatal weaknesses nowadays -- (because of almighty little
Netflix I guess, gosh Netflix must be a hairier outfit than I thought)
--  but the Internet never HAD governance.  It was always a distributed
techno-anarchy for geeks, and also for spooks.  

*You could make a pretty good argument that the *entire Internet* was
a "trojan horse" for geeks to unilaterally assert their social power
through a technical fait accompli.  Whoever voted for the Internet? 
They just wanted the Internet, that's all.

*Even if you've got tight, bulletproof, open-source code with nary a
zero-day exploit, you've still got the "Time for some traffic problems
in Fort Lee" problem.  That's a trojan horse of a sort  It's a almighty
trojan horse when guys with legitimate access to the control room, go
and surreptitiously pull some red lever, just because they know it's
gonna screw somebody else up. 

*No amount of code evangelism is gonna stop the control-room itself
from acting as the trojan horse.  On the contrary: the better the
systems work technically, the easier it is to discover some
mission-creep application that allows a sly operator to put the knife
in, and then act plausibly-deniable.  You're not gonna engineer-away
the human spite and wickedness, any more than you can engineer away
your *own* spite and wickedness.

*Also: you're never going to put some magic cyberdevice inside your
human body that has no human political and economic interests within
its hardware and software.  All human artifacts, below the skin or
above them, are frozen social relationships.  If you're somehow
burningly keen to consume a thing like that, you'd better, as William
Burroughs liked to put it, have a look at the end of the fork.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #67 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 14 03:45

    


With that said, we kinda are getting orwell-ed right out the huxley
nowadays, so I'd like to talk a bit about what that experience is like
in lived reality, instead of in the science-fiction classics.  

*There have been lots of surveillance societies around, and although
they look kinda like what Orwell portrayed, they're not so clean and
dramatic and lucidly vivid as they are in novels.

*You can have really good spies, like, super-disciplined, crafty,
well-financed, practically omniscient spies, and yet still lack the
executive capacity to do anything about what the spies say.  That's why
the US Congress isn't viscerally afraid of the NSA.  They know that
the spook geeks are just gonna issue some report.  Even if it's a
factual report, cogent and urgent, everybody in Congress is as free to
ignore it as they're free to ignore evolution and global warming.  

*The NSA are wondrous spies, but they lack any executive capacity. 
The NSA are not swaggering around in fascist black uniforms tossing
concrete blocks through the windows of crypto companies.  Normal
politicians who meet people from the NSA think they're shy, math-geek
weak-sisters who would be easy to beat up.  They regard them as
dilberts and poindexters, and it doesn't occur to them that these guys
might be disrupting representative democracy.

*The pols are probably pretty afraid of the vindictive tough-guy
Jersey minions of Chris Christie this week, but they're just not afraid
about the NSA.  They were more afraid of Watergate burglars than the
NSA, because, even though the Watergate crowd were just the President's
tiny private militia, they preyed on political parties, and that's
what matters to Congress.

*As an aside, the NSA's sister, the NRO, has what Orwell was really
afraid about all along -- cameras.  And nobody says a thing about the
NRO and their global surveillance capacities.  There's no NRO Snowden
to come out with some of the NRO's glossy contractor catalogs, but I'd
bet anything that the NRO's spook hardware is the true awesome. 
Really, the long gray hair would rise right off a hippie libertarian's
head.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #68 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 14 03:46

    
So…  When you're actually LIVING in a totalized surveillance society,
it's not an efficient, tireless, Faceboot kick-machine.  Orwell made
that up.   It's a great slogan, but people don't live in slogans,
there's not enough room. 

*Totalized surveillance societies are rickety and *weak.*  If they
were genuinely strong, they would have won a long time ago.  People
would have flocked to be surveilled, just for the sake of being on the
winner's side.  Everyday people don't mind surveillance all that much. 
They even find it comforting in some ways.  The problem is it doesn't
work out well in practice.

*The real problem is that the guys running the surveillance machinery
start surveilling each other.  Since they've got no sense of human
rights or legal and civic dignity, and they know their ardent comrades
don't either, it dawns on them that they've got to do each other in.  

*To do that, they've got to use the same illicit mechanisms that they
use to control the population, because, well, that's what they're good
at.  That's how they seized power in the first place.  So it means
civil war inside the trojan horse.  There's no law in there.  There is
no justice anywhere else, either -- but inside the trojan horse they've
got all the guns and knives.

*It's not that they fail to do massive, dreadful things against the
everyday people, of course; they may well eliminate entire sectors of
the population, cleanse ethnic areas, all that classic final-solution
stuff.  But they've got severe, irrevocable problems within their own
power-structure.

*Eventually, there will be some Night of the Long Knives purge, and
one guy will survive.  That seems okay for a while, because at least
there's just *one* guy that you have to appease, instead of this
frantic mafia of revolutionaries, gunning for each other while mowing
down crowds.  He's probably pretty competent, this dictator, in terms
of Darwinian survival anyhow.  But, as a head of state, he's got severe
management problems.

*Despite the surveillance -- even because of it -- it's impossible for
him to find out what's really going on, and to judge what matters. 
Everybody's diligently reporting on everybody else, but the
surveillance is like an end-in-itself.  Surveillance is not
opinion-polling, it's not elections, or citizen service; it's just
morally objectionable spying and police-tattling.   Anybody who starts
legitimately complaining, and who might become a healthy reform
movement of some kind, just gets rounded up for being noisy.  
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #69 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 14 03:47

    
*So all the society's legal, social and economic issues go
unredressed, except through the personal beneficence of the dictator. 
He's quickly surrounded by a clique of wily survivor-types who avidly
lie to him all the time.  He's kept very busy, but he's never in direct
face-to-face confrontation with  the genuine social problems.  The
best he can do is to demonize certain enemy groups, crank up the
one-way propaganda machine, and throw largesse at stuff that seems to
him like a grandiose idea, like, say, a moon-flight or something.

*Then -- absent some sudden defeat or regime failure -- the Great and
Powerful Oz there is human, and gets old.  He's tired, and frail, and
so is the bureaucracy around him.  There are no succession plans in
place, because it's never been dreamed that he would let go of absolute
power.  He may have some satraps around that he's decided not to kill,
but they've got all his organizational problems and then some; a
dictator's court is not a good training school for effective
administrators.

*So even though everybody's scared, and there is no freedom, and
treachery is omnipresent and it feels worse in some ways than George
Orwell had the space to describe in his book, an omniscient
surveillance society is a weirdly *numb* society.  It's like it's got
huge, staring, unblinking eyeballs, but no nerves and atrophied limbs. 
It can't yawn, scratch its own itches, party down or make itself a
chicken dinner; it's just bad at the cozy minutiae of daily life.  It
de-motivates creative talent and it stunts most forms of ambition. 
It's a balked and frustrated society, with a palsied,
obsessive-compulsive quality.  

*It's poor, too.  Poverty is at hand when a thing that drastic happens
to you.  You don't possess the necessary money to stamp everybody's
face with a boot forever; you'd like to do it, of course, but the
business model doesn't work.  Basically, you're gonna be living off the
local oil, or selling your women offshore, or maybe invading Albania
because you somehow imagine there's loot there.  

*You'd better not try invading somebody richer than you, despite your
teeming hosts of spies, informants and shock troops, because, well,
they're probably gonna invent something during the course of the war
that will blow you right off the map.

*But that's not the worst of it.  Lots of countries get invaded and
conquered and dominated by richer guys.  It happens; but that's not
what happens to you.  The worst legacy of a totalitarian society is
that, when the defeat comes, the victors freakin' expunge you.  They go
for every statue, all your patriotic schoolbooks, your top guys, your
street-names, flags, and regalia,  your favorite cult icons, cool
super-weapons and concrete megastructures…  They even ritually ban and
forget and shun your favorite curvaceous movie-stars.  

*Everybody involved in your regime swears they had nothing to do with
it and they acted only under duress; they despise and dishonor
everything you built; they don't mention you in their memoirs, they
never celebrate your anniversaries, your grandchildren never speak of
you, they they never sing your marching songs…

*Nobody's ever written a science-fiction novel about that, but I've
seen it with my own eyes.  It's truly very scary.  The thoroughness of
that historical obliteration, the joy of it, the lack of second
thoughts, the utter absence of sentimental nostalgia.  It's a "fate
you'd wish on your worst enemy," but it's truly an awful fate.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #70 of 196: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 10 Jan 14 06:25

    
Pausing for a deep breath after that great rant Bruce. 

I'm wondering if I'm not alone in finding myself redefining my
relationship(s) with my failed nation-state? It was easy to march in
the streets in the '60's when there was still the feeling that you
could make a change. Not so easy today - take Occupy for example. We're
not going to flash/smart mob our way out of this one. 

I'm not sure what a "reasonable right to privacy" is anymore, but I'm
pretty sure I don't have it. 

And, as Jon points out, there are plenty of digital weapons of 'mass
distraction' to keep us all off base.

Enough angst and ennui to go around for everyone. Maybe we could start
an A&E You Tube channel for angst and ennui posts?

So, my question is, how are you both finding balance in this new
frontier and what courses of action seem promising?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #71 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 10 Jan 14 15:04

    
> how are you both finding balance in this new
> frontier and what courses of action seem promising?

You mention that feeling, in the 60's, "that you could make a change."
Martin Luther King changed something back then, but the Civil Rights
movement would have been there, with or without him. He was a catalyst,
he showed courage, we see him as a hero, almost superhuman.

In today's world, MLK would have been outed as a mere mortal. His
affairs and other foibles would have been exposed, his
everyday-human-ness would be obvious. Anti-MLK hate campaigns would
thrive via bulk-email to private email accounts as well as via
thousands of disinformation websites. Who knows if he could've made it
to the mountain given a 21st century orgy of exposure and vilification.


We have no heroes now, just mere mortals, persistently exposed via the
new media panopticon, a hungry ghost starved for sensation and
scandal. We can't even abide fictional heroism; it's telling that the
most potent protagonist of our era so far has been Walter White, an
tragic anti-hero of Shakespearean proportions, representing a very
human and real hubris and evil. 

I do hope that we, mere mortals, puny humans, can become, each in his
own way, what Bucky Fuller talked about, the "trim tab":

"It's a miniature rudder. Just moving the little trim tab builds a low
pressure that pulls the rudder around. Takes almost no effort at all.
So I said that the little individual can be a trim tab. Society thinks
it's going right by you, that it's left you altogether. But if you're
doing dynamic things mentally, the fact is that you can just put your
foot out like that and the whole big ship of state is going to go."

Bucky said "Call me Trim Tab." I think they put that on his grave.

I like to hope that we can find some sort of salvation through smaller
effective acts of ordinary people.

Meanwhile, my own course of action is to turn inward and study my own
machine, watching my thoughts, watching my actions, trying to go
deeper. Trying to understand what's behind the worlds and ideas and
movements of each day.

Here's something interesting by Roger Ebert's wife, about
conversations with him at the end of his life:

"...the day before he passed away, he wrote me a note: 'This is all an
elaborate hoax.' I asked him, 'What's a hoax?' And he was talking
about this world, this place. He said it was all an illusion. I thought
he was just confused. But he was not confused. He wasn't visiting
heaven, not the way we think of heaven. He described it as a vastness
that you can't even imagine. It was a place where the past, present,
and future were happening all at once."
http://www.esquire.com/blogs/news/roger-ebert-final-moments
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #72 of 196: david gault (dgault) Fri 10 Jan 14 16:16

    

California State Senate is feeling their oats,
as described in this link posted to FB by former
well guy...oh wait, this is publicly readable and
I haven't his permission to use his name.
The story speaks for itself:

http://antiwar.com/blog/2014/01/09/the-bipartisan-effort-to-deprive-the-nsa-of
-water-and-electricity/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #73 of 196: Gary Nolan (gnolan) Fri 10 Jan 14 23:50

    
Bruce's good rant, particularly post <66>, summarizes the ground rules
I have assumed were in place from the outset. I suspect the lack of
sustained outrage towards the NSA by the public is due to some level of
understanding that electronic communication just is not secure. By the
time of the NSA disclosures people have for years been giving up
personal details to Facebook, Google, Amazon and so on. Perhaps the
private sector superiority over public myth makes it OK to surrender
personal life details to big business, often headed by right wing
figures such as Zuckerberg, but not to the damn government.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #74 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 01:46

    
*Studying Turkish politics is of great help in understanding this
"Deep State" business in the USA.  The Turks have had a Shadow State
for absolute ages now.

*Turks take comfort in having the Army and secret services in charge,
because they know the civilian political parties are corrupt and
irresponsible.  A lot of Turkish political parties model themselves on
the military, or are keen on private militias in political guise.

*Civil society in Turkey is very much corroded by endless terror
provocations, too.

*In a US context, when your military-industrial complex gets spooky,
you get an espionage-industrial complex.

http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/an-awkward-question-for-ro
bert-gates-has-the-deep-state-taken-over/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #75 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 01:55

    
*Here's a bunch of writers, most of them not Americans, complaining
about what mass surveillance does to the cause of literature.  The USA
didn't seem to notice this petition much, but I find it quite
interesting and symptomatic of our times…  I don't know quite what to
say about it yet, because there are some parts I'm quite keen on, while
others seem to emerge from a la-la-land where it's all about the
primacy of the midnight lamp and the typewriter.

*I can't really untangle it within the Well SOTW, but maybe I'll write
an article about it for MEDIUM soon.  It's one of those MEDIUM-like,
politicized situations where I'm torn between sympathy and dread… And
really, if you needed some cultural evidence for why the year 2014 has
"an extraordinary atmosphere of sullen, baffled evil," this screed
would pretty well do it.


http://www.change.org/petitions/a-stand-for-democracy-in-the-digital-age-3

A STAND FOR DEMOCRACY IN THE DIGITAL AGE
Petition by Writers Against Mass Surveillance

On International Human Rights Day, 562 authors, including 5 Nobel
Prize laureates, from over 80 countries have joined  together to launch
an appeal in defense of civil liberties against surveillance by
corporations and governments. 5 Nobel Prize Winners have signed: 

Orhan Pamuk, J.M. Coetzee, Elfriede Jelinek, Günter Grass and Tomas
Tranströmer. Also among the signatories are Umberto Eco, Margaret
Atwood, Don DeLillo, Daniel Kehlmann, Nawal El Saadawi, Arundhati Roy,
Henning Mankell, Richard Ford, Javier Marias, Björk, David Grossman,
Arnon Grünberg, Angeles Mastretta, Juan Goytisolo, Nuruddin Farah, João
Ribeiro, Victor Erofeyev, Liao Yiwu and David Malouf.

This global pledge was organized by an independent international group
of authors -  Juli Zeh, Ilija Trojanow, Eva Menasse, Janne Teller,
Priya Basil, Isabel Cole, and Josef Haslinger. On Dec 10 it is
published in 30 news papers all around the world:

***************************************************

In recent months, the extent of mass surveillance has become common
knowledge. With a few clicks of the mouse the state can access your
mobile device, your e-mail, your social networking and Internet
searches. 

It can follow your political leanings and activities and, in
partnership with Internet corporations, it collects and stores your
data, and thus can predict your consumption and behaviour. 

The basic pillar of democracy is the inviolable integrity of the
individual. Human integrity extends beyond the physical body. In their
thoughts and in their personal environments and communications, all
humans have the right to remain unobserved and unmolested. 

This fundamental human right has been rendered null and void through
abuse of technological developments by states and corporations for mass
surveillance purposes.

A person under surveillance is no longer free; a society under
surveillance is no longer a democracy.

To maintain any validity, our democratic rights must apply in virtual
as in real space.

* Surveillance violates the private sphere and compromises freedom of
thought and opinion. 
* Mass surveillance treats every citizen as a potential suspect. It
overturns one of our historical  triumphs, the presumption of
innocence. 
* Surveillance makes the individual transparent, while the state and
the corporation operate in secret. As we have seen, this power is being
systemically abused.
* Surveillance is theft. This data is not public property: it belongs
to us. When it is used to predict our behaviour, we are robbed of
something else: the principle of free will crucial to democratic
liberty.

WE DEMAND THE RIGHT for all people to determine, as democratic
citizens, to what extent their personal data may be legally collected,
stored and processed, and by whom; to obtain information on where their
data is stored and how it is being used; to obtain the deletion of
their data if it has been illegally collected and stored.

WE CALL ON ALL STATES AND CORPORATIONS to respect these rights.

WE CALL ON ALL CITIZENS to stand up and defend these rights.

WE CALL ON THE UNITED NATIONS to acknowledge the central importance of
protecting civil rights in the digital age, and to create an
International Bill of Digital Rights. 

WE CALL ON GOVERNMENTS to sign and adhere to such a convention.

Initiators:
Juli Zeh Germany
Ilija Trojanow Germany
Eva Menasse Germany
Janne Teller Denmark
Priya Basil UK
Isabel Fargo Cole USA
Josef Haslinger Austria
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #76 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 01:59

    
*By the way, I have left Belgrade and have now arrived in Torino.  

*Soon the Turinese aspects of my personality will take over, and I'll
start being alert, mystical and subversive, rather than the way I
commonly am in Belgrade:  soulful, woozy and sarcastic.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #77 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 02:12

    
*In Europe there seems to be this mostly-electronic habit of people
appending their nations to their names.  Usually they use a two-letter
net abbreviation, in parentheses:  for instance "Iliya Trojnanow
Germany" from that writerly petition up there would read "Iliya
Trojanow (DE)."

*However, there are so many people in Europe now with two national
residences (and I'm guessing that Herr Trojanow there might be one of
them) that even this new, and kind-of-helpful convention seems to be
strained:  nowadays, you get these polyglot self-identifications in
modern Europe, stuff along the line of "Deirdre Gorbachov (RU) (GB),"
or maybe "Dottoressa Paola Josipovic-Haakon" (IT) (HR) (NO).

*Nobody is ever just (EU) in Europe, either.  I'm not really (EU)
myself, but I'm thinking maybe I should be one of the first to try that
out, just to stir the pot a little.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #78 of 196: reid harward (reid) Sat 11 Jan 14 04:46

    

Isn't this the ten year anniversary of the Viridian design movement's
death or something?  I seem to recall seeing something circulating to
that effect.  

There was a huge chemical spill in southern West Virginia yesterday. 
Fracking is a daily reality.  It's pretty grim.  Is there any way to
design our way out of this mess at this point?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #79 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 14 05:13

    
The Viridian Design movement didn't so much die as declare victory and
move on. Bruce may have a different take - it was his project - but as
an active member of the Viridian "curia" I saw the project as a great
success. Designers and futurists started thinking, talking, and working
around climate change, and the issue found its way into mainstream
conversation, partly because it had been dropped into the formulary of
those professionals who prescribe the zeitgeist.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #80 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 14 05:50

    
Re <79>: I've always argued that "democracy" is difficult, because
there are diverse assumptions around the meaning and the practice that
term suggests. It's often subjective, about protecting MY freedoms,
whereas any real sense of democracy requires a balance... my freedoms
may be constrained by my neighbor's, and how can I say that my liberty
trumps theirs? This is a weakness of the libertarian perspective, I
think: at least based on my observations of libertarians I've known,
they seem to be very focused on their personal exercise of freedom, and
less concerned about the broader social contract.

I'm pondering the idea expressed in that "stand for democracy," that
"surveillance violates the private sphere and compromises freedom of
thought and opinion." I can imagine an NSA wonk responding to this,
saying "...but we're trying to PROTECT your freedom of thought and
opinion." NSA people I've talked to truly don't seem to care about the
content of communication beyond perceived patterns suggesting potential
threats. They don't see themselves as bad guys in the J. Edgar Hoover
sense - gathering intelligence to enhance and preserve power, using it
in ways that are harmful and abusive.

Could there ever be an argument that surveillance is necessary to
protect democracy?

I'm asking the question sincerely, I don't know the answer. The
problem I see with surveillance vs democracy is the lack of
transparency. If our system of governance is truly democratic, then
people have a right to know that they're being watched, and they have a
right to approve that surveillance and, if approved, constrain it as
needed to ensure that it doesn't violate that social contract I
mentioned earlier, which in a truly democratic context should say that
any one of us can have conditional freedom, where the condition is that
my freedom doesn't unreasonably constrain my neighbor's. (This makes
me think about Lenny Bruce's bit on "how the law got started":
http://cellar.org/showthread.php?t=24181)

Given what I just said, I think this is reasonable:

"WE DEMAND THE RIGHT for all people to determine, as democratic
citizens, to what extent their personal data may be legally collected,
stored and processed, and by whom; to obtain information on where their
data is stored and how it is being used; to obtain the deletion of
their data if it has been illegally collected and stored."

Bruce, I'm trying to get behind your sense of dread. Do you think this
is too idealistic?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #81 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 07:31

    
*Hey look WELLbeings, it's your place in computer art history.  As
seen from Germany, but in terms of computer art, Germany's a great
place to be seen from.

http://iasl.uni-muenchen.de/links/GCA-VI.1e.html

"During the eighties and the early nineties the participants of
Bulletin Board Systems (BBS) developed an awareness of "virtual
communities" 20 communicating with each other in writing from remote
places without time delay. The free and open software of networks
constantly developed further as well as the abolished division between
readers and authors (see chap. VI.1.2) are cornerstones of the demand
for a free, unrestricted data exchange initiating the start of net
activism. 

"In the nineties activists rejected efforts to restrict web accesses
through censorship, copyright, charges and other barriers. 21

"In 1985 the network The WELL (the Whole Earth ´Lectronic Link)
started in Sausalito/California. Its system was based on a BBS
programme for video conferences (PicoSpan für Unix) offering all
participants access to a database. 22 The WELL was an online proceeding
of the information exchange constituting the core of the "Whole Earth
Catalog". After its first print in autumn 1968 Stewart Brand edited
updates until 1994. This `catalogue in progress´ featured books and
technologies inspiring people living in the Bay Area´ s surroundings of
the commune keepers and the grassroots activism. Buckminster Fuller´s
all-encompassing world view was the main inspiration:

T"he insights of Buckminster Fuller are what initiated this catalog.
23

&#65532;
"Brand, Stewart (ed.): Whole Earth Catalog. Fall 1968: Buckminster
Fuller&#8232;(Brand: Earth 1968, p.3).

"The transformation of the print version into The WELL included fora
being open for the readers´ propositions and contributions. The
"network forum" for the communication between the authors of the prints
version was developed further into public conferences and newsgroups.
24

"Following Fred Turner the counterculture of the sixties ´ New
Communalist movement with estimated between two and six thousand
communes in the U.S.A., many of them located in the Bay Area, was
converted in the eighties in "virtual communities" by The WELL. 25

"One of the public conferences on The WELL was the Art Com Electronic
Network (ACEN, see chap. VI.1.2). 26"
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #82 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 07:44

    
*Here in MEDIUM some worthy souls were scratching their heads over
Viridian.  I don't think any of them believe Viridian was victorious. 
If it was victorious, then carbon dioxide levels would be dropping now.


https://medium.com/5-viridian-years

*Instead of, for instance, fried bats literally falling dead out of
the sky in Australia.

http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/news/regions/asia-pacific/140108/100000-bat
s-dead-after-heatwave-australia

*I think some of these MEDIUM people are quite right in their
assessment that Viridian ideas seem quite dated now.  There was a
window of cultural opportunity in which that approach might have gone
mainstream, but that time is behind us.  The era after 2008 is very
different, and Viridian doesn't speak to our lived condition any more.

*Vaclav Havel said, "Hope is not the conviction that something will
turn out well, but the certainty that something makes sense, regardless
of how it turns out."  The World Wide Web didn't turn out the way the
WELL might have imagined in 1985, either, but it was still a good idea
to try it.  It would have been a good idea to try it, even if the WELL
had lasted six weeks.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #83 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 14 08:32

    
> I don't think any of them believe Viridian was victorious.

You can win the battle and lose the war, and vice versa. If the "war"
was against the anthropogenic elements of climate change, Viridian was
a loss... but that war was unwinnable, we were too far along at that
point. If the war was for acknowledgement and visibility, it was a win
somewhat offset by the later success of the propaganda campaign of
denial. By now it's hard to plausibly deny the fact of climate change,
though we're still slow to respond. We'll have to adapt, to promote
resilience. There's already a society of adaptation professionals:
http://adaptationprofessionals.org/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #84 of 196: Patrick Lichty (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 14 08:36

    
[Our friend and colleague Pat Lichty wondered why we hadn't brought
art into the discussion so far. I asked him to fire the first shot.
//@jonl]

Jon, Bruce, in reading this year’s State of the World, except for the
mention of 3D printing, which is only a medium/technology, there wasn’t
much mention of art beyond the fading ability of fiction to transcend
the everyday.  There are three musings that I would like to reflect on,
while not definitive signposts, maybe they are breadcrumbs to where
art has situated itself in the world.

I recently read a piece by Julian Stallabrass about the abjection of
the art fair. The art world itself is changing radically, with brick
and mortar eroding to online commerce, with Amazon even becoming an art
dealer.  Stallabrass’ article talks of the vapidity, sexual predation,
and sheer greed evident in today’s exploding art fair environment.  My
favorite incident this year was regarding former enfant terrible Jeff
Deitch, who went from NYC to that LACMA, to be urged back to NYC.  The
incident I refer to was that at Art Basel Miami, he overheard that
Kanye West was in his booth, and seeing a black man in his booth, he
strode up to him and said, “Hi, Kanye!,”only to be surprised that it
was Sean “Diddy” Combs.  The fact that this was one of the biggest
stories of ABM was telling in itself.

The Warholian legends of the super-famous in music and art came to a
head, not with Lady Gaga’s disastrous ArtRave with Jeff Koons, but with
the 6 hour performance at Pace by Jay-Z of “Picasso, Baby” with
performance art doyenne Marina Abramovic.  Don’t get me wrong, I have
worked with organizer Roselee Goldberg myself, and a number of other
figures in this movement of super-constellating.  However, I feel like
Abramovic’ acts of remediation, starting in 2005 with her “Seven Easy
Pieces” at the Guggenheim, have almost turned into artisanal sausage
making for the 1% shoved through a Warhol sausage grinder.  It isn’t
that it’s necessarily bad; but then I feel like the risk that has been
the hallmark of performance artists like Abramovic are being converted
to things like the Abramovic Institute, where she “teaches” others her
processes of endurance.  This puzzles me; let’s leave it at that.

So, what of the activism I was raving about at SxSW last year?  It’s
still there, as groups like The Overpass Light Brigade are organizing
fantastic events of luminous words of dissent at a highway near you.
But art as a form of social agency is in a period of transition, with
my own group/collaborators (depending on the day or who you talk to)
have all but ceased to be effective on their own, due to their fame,
and are resurrecting the RTMark “mutual Fund Portfolio” in the form of
the Yes Men “Action Switchboard” through their Yes Lab – the equivalent
of the activist’s Abramovic Institute.  In addition, Occupy seems to
be visible in name only, and even Creative Time (Nato Thompson being a
person who I venerate) allowed the publication of an abominable project
by Andres Serrano in which he paid homeless people $20 for their signs
for a video project.  I was gobsmacked.

So, you may ask, what do I feel is the art of the Zeitgeist?  I think
that came from Oxford when they termed the word of the year as
“Selfie”.  As I organize a photography exhibition on the subject for
release later this year, I am simultaneously fascinated and horrified
by the contexts under which the narcissistic gaze manifests itself.
Selfies at funerals, selfies while driving, selfies while just about to
be hit by a baseball, selfies the moment before suicide.   I feel like
Western culture has gone from the Kubrick/Roddenberry/Sagan idealism
of reaching for the starsto making sure you look good or get a good lol
before the rising water cancels Jersey Shore or the drone overhead
gets your picture on the Net first.  

Elsewhere in media art, the unprecedented use of the word “post” is
unprecedented to the point where culture is so over itself to the point
that what remains is a “super-hybrid” mélange of unicorns, kittens,
animated GIFs of lactation, and the truckload of memes.  Augmented
Reality is dying as an avant medium, and according to Rhizome, the
Oculus Rift will be 2014’s “medium of the year”, along with the scad of
3D scxanners, completing the fabrication ecosystem.

Perhaps I am being too dystopic, as there are some interesting things
being done with 3D printing, the new art/academic-meme of “social
practice” has a lot of redeeming qualities.  And don’t get me wrong,
there are a lot of good people out there, like the online art
communities (especially London’s Furtherfield), Honor Harger, who Bruce
lamented her leaving Lighthouse UK (and for whom I nearly applied to
be art director), and Creative Time (I know, but everyone plays a
clinker once in a while).

And my final note is sort of a tag cloud: I agree about the Turks, but
Istanbul is still a hot art town, the Chinese (enough said). The new
“Love is Lost” Bowie video, and the Internet Cat Video Festival, which
I’m writing about this year.

Thanks to Jon for asking me to chime in, and we’ll see you at our
panel at SxSW!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #85 of 196: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Sat 11 Jan 14 08:43

    
> is due to some level of understanding that electronic communication
> just is not secure.

I worked in the privacy field for roughly a decade and I would say
exactly the opposite.  True, people probably post on Facebook with
some vague understanding that their post is visible to the world, but
what about their shopping habits and medical records?

In the US we have some vague protection of our medical information via
HIPAA, but does that apply to your general shopping at pharmacies or
Target?  The latter can track purchases so closely that they can
predict when certain customers have become pregnant, simply on their
purchase logistics.

How about all the purchases made with your credit card?  How many
people know that their credit card transactions can be reliably used
to predict not just marraige, but divorce?

You're going to buy a car, and you fill out a loan application at the
dealer.  What else do they know about you -- based on buying marketing
information -- that they can use against you when deciding where they
will draw the line on a purchase price?

It's not really a secret, companies like Experian even provide online
services:

<http://www.experian.com/dataselect/dataselect.html>

"[...] draws from the most complete demographic, firmographic,
transactional and behavioral information available to provide powerful
data from one resource."

Where does all that data come from?  Did you give anything to
Experian?  Did you even know they existed?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #86 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 14 09:41

    
http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20140107-how-i-became-a-cyborg/all

*Have a look at this, if you'd like a glimpse at what the future
politics of implanted devices will look like.  Hint: they'll be almost
as legally messy as the biological function of genuine internal organs.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #87 of 196: Morgan Rowe-Morris (rowemorris) Sat 11 Jan 14 13:37

    <scribbled>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #88 of 196: Gail Williams (gail) Sat 11 Jan 14 18:42

    
Hmm.  There was a time when a coup in private company was more likely
and probably less visible than one in a government entity wold be, at
least in the US, but that may not be true any more.

The article about Gates' remark in the Atlantic raises the question of
a coup or gradual drift of values in the shadow government that we
might never hear about.  There may simply be no way to know how much
one should trust the Deep State, or how it might be evolving.  


So far as cyborgs go, reading that got me thinking that we are cyborgs
when we drive, right? And the car may be ours, but the ability to
modify it at will and use the modifications in any way we wish is not. 
 However, we haven't even decided why Tommy Johns surgery "incidental"
arm strength augmentation is ok in baseball but steroids are not. 
Getting to semi-consensus about what is allowable is awfully slow, it
seems.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #89 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 14 01:19

    
*Patrick Lichty, I totally get where you're coming from (because I'm
on some of your favorite mailing lists), but dissing Marina Abramovic
is, like, verboten in my household.  Marina can come over and get naked
and lie in my doorway anytime she wants.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #90 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 14 01:41

    
*It's easy to romanticize the Deep State, but once you're inside the
Deep State, it just looks like a bunch of unprincipled, secretive,
armed hoodlums eager to kill you.  Some other player is gonna put a
foot wrong because nobody knows where the boundaries are.  Then it's
gonna be purgeville.

*This guy was such an awesome Turkish Deep State figure that I wrote a
novel about him once.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abdullah_Çatl&#305;

*A NATO anti-terror guy by trade, our Mr Catli there.  Like the
daughter  said, after his doings came to light through a literal
accident:  "My father had his own understanding of justice. He was
trying to achieve this justice with his group on behalf of his nation."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #91 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 14 01:45

    
*Whoops, it turns out that Mr Catli's Turkish character-set on
Wikipedia is un-linkable within our Anglophone internet.  How
Deep-State of him.  Try Googling "Abdullah Catli."

*Oh wait!  They'll *know* if you use Google.  Try Binging "Abdullah
Catli," then let us know how that works out for you.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #92 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 14 01:47

    
*Catli's daughter used to have a commemorative website, "catli.com,"
where she publicly idolized her dad's doings, but it's gone 404 now. 
Man, that's the modern condition all over.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #93 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 14 07:44

    
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abdullah_%C3%87atl%C4%B1 actually does
work to link the Wikipedia article.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #94 of 196: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 12 Jan 14 08:21

    
Not found:
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/an-awkward-question-for-ro
bert-gates-has-the-deep-state-taken-over/>

Should be:
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/an-awkward-question-for-ro
bert-gates-has-the-deep-state-taken-over/282934/>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #95 of 196: Nor any drop to drink... (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 14 08:41

    
West Virginia's getting a taste of the unfortunately probable future:
http://www.latimes.com/nation/nationnow/la-na-nn-west-virginia-chemical-spill-
20140111,0,6604147.story#axzz2qCc0zmDW

http://www.wunderground.com/news/chemical-spill-leaves-thousands-without-water
-20140109

Quality potable water is becoming an increasingly scarce commodity.
We're literally poisoning the well:
http://www.cbsnews.com/news/some-states-confirm-water-pollution-from-oil-and-g
as-drilling/

Water privatization - threat, or menace?
http://www.newsweek.com/race-buy-worlds-water-73893

http://www.utne.com/politics/water-privatization-zm0z14jfzros.aspx

Here's a solution - we'll just dump toxins in the ocean. What could go
wrong? http://www.indybay.org/newsitems/2014/01/11/18749056.php

http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jan/02/plastic-waste-thames-marine
-life-report
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #96 of 196: David Swedlow (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 14 09:04

    
[Here's great input from my pal David Swedlow...]

Okay, so Snowden held a mirror up to the US that should be met with
outrage, but instead is greeted locally by an "oh well" shrug and a
mumble of, "wow, bummer dude." Not to mention the fresh hard-ons
springing up as intel-crazed dictators around the world unfurl the
centerfold of that glossy catalog. Still, the focus on dystopian rants
this year seems a bit one-sided. I admit, this last year I really
looked closely at my unrelenting desire for a techno-utopia and I
finally realized that this fantasy is more of a hinderence than
inspiration. Reading Zoltan Istvan's savior-AI piece
(http://m.huffpost.com/us/entry/4496550), I realized how this santa
claus vision of all powerful AI wizard sweeping in and solving all the
worlds problems is just a childish wish for a never-land that never has
and never will exist. Istvan wrote "The Transhumanist Wager" which I
haven't read, but suppose I ought to. I am, after all, finally reading
Atlas Shrugged to round out my reading list.

My favorite reads of 2013 have been "AntiFragile" by Nicholas Nassim
Taleb (who beautifully captures our capacity for over-optimism and
self-delusion, while noting that all is not lost if we'll dive headlong
into the harder questions) and "Nexus" and "Crux" by Ramez Naam (who
brings a very welcome fresh breath of air to singularity fiction).

I'm currently reading "Turing's Cathedral" by George Dyson, and I'm
struck by how excited and productive Johnny von Neumann  and crew got
with punchcards, no OS and a whopping 357 multiplications per second.
Even more amazing is just how clearly Johnny realized that the future
problems and questions that we would tackle were unfathomable from his
vantage point. That was nearly 70 years ago, and has already been
pointed out, our inexhaustable capacity to turn technologies of
miraculous connectivity into implements of mass distraction is
gob-smacking.

But time to turn the mirror to a true perpendicular to my line of
sight, taking a hard look at what "you-know-who" is doing about it.

I am somewhat inspired by the "hour of code" project, though, really,
in this day and age, that is woefully inadequate to the task at hand.

The problem with my utopaphilia has always been the "lottery" version
of salvation, in which all my "problems" magically evaporate. I'd like
to stoke the imagination of others, a-la Jason Silva, to envision a
globe-spanning collective of peer-to-peer cooperatives, re-imagining
the self and what it means to "save the world," thankful for the
freedom to drop the top-down solutions from on high and taking up the
challenge closer to home.

How about we re-read Bucky Fuller again, and the idea of the World
Game (now that we actually have the necessary infrastructure) and
challenge each other to filter those ideas through McGonigal's "Reality
is Broken" and Diamandis' "Abundance". I'd like bootstrap some a
mash-up of gaming engines and feedback loops and quantized self and
free education and maker culture get busy obsoleting this stagnant
status-quo distractionism.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #97 of 196: Gary Nolan (gnolan) Sun 12 Jan 14 11:37

    
#87 I share that view <rowemorris>.

Not sure if the references to B. Fuller in this discussion are meant
as anything more than references to a certain time, but his notions
deserve to be dusted off even if he is a little quaint.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #98 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Sun 12 Jan 14 12:35

    
teabags with your water?
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/12/19/leadership/koch-
brothers.pr.fortune/index.html>
full story is behind the paywall.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #99 of 196: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 12 Jan 14 13:10

    

Bruce wrote:

> And why is this news about science even "reporting" -- why aren't
you a blogger, or an activist, or an industry booster; why is this a
"science news story," why isn't it an app, or a Kickstarter?  Why is this
"journalism"?  Isn't journalism a weirdly old-fashioned, visibly decaying
thing to do nowadays, with businesses that can't support themselves,
with methods of production and methods of distribution that are clearly
dwindling away?  How can it be "news" when everything supporting it is
old and rotten?  Reading self-conscious contemporary "journalism" is like
listening to Woodie Guthrie singing to the Wobblies off the caboose of
a train.

Being a freelance journalist myself, I have skin in the game and can't
respond to this in a way that isn't self-interest to some essential degree.
But I will ask: Are you really suggesting that unpaid enthusiasts,
political operatives, and PR flacks can *replace* people like me, who have
some facility with asking pertinent questions and sorting the responses
for relevance and truthfulness?

Do you think there's less need, now, for journalists? It was a journalist
who broke Snowden's story and made it comprehensible for the largest
audience.

As for the support structure underneath journalists and journalism,
I'm sure you know as well as I do that this ebbing period of news as a
profitable business was not the norm, just like the 1980s art market in
NYC was a wildly lucrative abberation in the history of a profession that
is marginal for almost everyone who take it up.

For much longer, the news has been underwritten by millionaires with
a yen for the newspaper trade, or the TV network's sports programming,
or the magazine's annual swimsuit issue.

Now we're progressing into Buzzfeed's business of supporting hard news
reporting with "25 Cats Who Look Just Like Hollywood Celebrities."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #100 of 196: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 12 Jan 14 13:29

    

With Jeff Bezos and Pierre Omidyar as our 21st century William Randolph
Hearst, between the two of them.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #101 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 14 16:26

    
<emilyg>, am I crazy to think that professional journalism is coming
back? That paywalls are actually working? That there's a renewed hunger
for in-depth journalism?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #102 of 196: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 12 Jan 14 17:54

    
I'm no expert on the business side of running a news outlet. Speaking
solely as someone with a vested professional interest, however: The
signals were mixed on paywalls last year. 

Some newspapers dismantled them--the San Francisco Chronicle comes to
mind as a particular debacle. But people I know are encouraged by the
progress at The New York Times, which went to a "metered" paywall
(fixed number of free articles per month for non-payers, as well as
more nuanced payment tiers) at some point in the past two or three
years, and says it's now earning more from subscriptions than online
advertising.

The Times is a national and even global news outlet, though; those
outlets, plus the really local small papers, have done best with
paywalls, AFAIK. Signs are not great for regional papers like the
Chron, the Miami Herald, and similar, even good ones.

Here's a recent article at niemanlab.org that I found illuminating on
the state of paywall strategy and tech, going into 2014:

<http://www.niemanlab.org/2013/11/the-newsonomics-of-the-shopping-of-press-and-
the-coming-of-paywalls-2-0/>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #103 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 14 18:12

    
My impression, more of a hunch, not evidence-based, is that the era of
free is behind us, that we're seeing successful strategies for payment
and a consumer expectation that worthwhile content will have a
cost.Not that journalists will be rolling in dough, but I dare to hope
that professional writers and other creators of content in various
forms can make a living after all.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #104 of 196: Ed Ward (captward) Sun 12 Jan 14 18:33

    
If we don't die of starvation first, of course. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #105 of 196: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sun 12 Jan 14 19:19

    
That's the challenge.

As for in-depth reporting, it's encouraging that so many new efforts
are commissioning the longer pieces--Narratively and Epic Magazine and
the Atavist and others.  I don't know what the "business models"
are--what their knowledge is about sustained demand for that kind of
reporting--and not all of them pay very well at the moment. 

But it's a relief that at long last there are some astute people
looking for the angles to render them sustainable financially.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #106 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 14 00:58

    
Relevant to the "end of free," this post from David Weinberger about
blogging:
http://hyperorg.com/blogger/2014/01/08/what-blogging-was/comment-page-1/

"...it was Clay Shirky’s Power Law post that rang the tocsin. His
analysis showed that the blogosphere wasn’t a smooth ball where
everyone had an equal voice. Rather, it was dominated by a handful of
sites that pulled enormous numbers, followed by a loooooooooong tail of
sites with a few followers. The old pernicious topology had reasserted
itself. We should have known that it would, and it took a while for
the miserable fact to sink in.

"Yet there was hope in that long tail. As Chris Anderson pointed out
in a book and article, the area under the long tail is bigger than the
area under the short head. For vendors, that means there’s lots of
money in the long tail. For bloggers that means there are lots of
readers and conversationalists under the long tail. More important, the
long tail of blogs was never homogenous; the small clusters that
formed around particular interests can have tremendous value that the
short head can never deliver."

Read the post, it's rich. Read the comments, too.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #107 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:43

    
Emily Gertz (emilyg)   Are you really suggesting that unpaid
enthusiasts,
political operatives, and PR flacks can *replace* people like me, who
have
some facility with asking pertinent questions and sorting the
responses
for relevance and truthfulness?


*Well, no, Emily, I would never say that; I'm a very "dead media" guy,
so I never bought into that early-blogger ideology, even though I was
an early blogger.

*However, I've seen plenty of working societies where people like you
aren't allowed to operate.  Freelance journalists can in fact be
replaced by various kinds of publicity apparatchiks.  

*Berlusconi stayed in power for decades because he was a media mogul
in control of the Italian TV fare, while the former Yugoslavia was a
dictatorship.  So, the "relevance" and the "truthfulness" were probably
just as "needed" there as ever anywhere, but they just weren't valued.
 They didn't happen.   Civil society in those states didn't expect to
get their "truth" and "relevance" from anything that was "public."  

*They weren't even cynical about that situation; they just knew that
was how public life was, everybody knew.  The truth would pop up
publicly every once in a while, but it was socially inconvenient, just
like global-warming truth, or NSA truth, is inside the USA now.

*People can get along under those conditions; in fact it's the way
things normally work in most human societies.  Most human societies are
devoutly religious, after all.  People with Scriptures aren't keen on
pertinent questions sorted for relevance and truthfulness, because they
figure they've already got the answers handy.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #108 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:43

    

*I happen to be a novelist as well as a journalist, and we're inside a
situation nowadays where novels are as disrupted as the news is.  But
I'm hard put to say that novels, or even literature, are "needed" any
more than journalism.  I've been in lots of minority-language societies
where "novels" exist -- they do get written sometimes -- but only
occasionally, and among small groups of enthusiasts, and where
novelists never, ever make money.  

*These novelists don't "starve" or anything quite so drastic -- they
just teach high school, or they work for insurance bureaucracies…   If
you walk around the streets, the local people aren't gasping for lack
of air because they lack novels. 

*If you'd asked John Keats if there was any "truth" in the journalism
of his day, Keats would have said no, that all the newspapers were
organs of party faction, and that the "truth," and also the beauty, was
in poetry.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #109 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:44

    
*Our own society don't have "Poetry."  Poetry is already gone.  We
don't miss it any more than those un-novelled societies miss novels. 
That's a major cultural loss we've already experienced through media
transition.   

*I mean, we do still have oodles of poems around of course, but it's
all of that unpaid-enthusiast, unsorted, so-what variety.  We no longer
rejoice in that  huge and ponderous cultural institution of Capital-P
Poetry, where the great poets were vastly read and hugely honored, even
by people who didn't speak their language.  

*"Poetry" is certainly much, much older and more "needed" than
"Journalism." Poetry is probably pre-human in its origin, while
Journalism is only three or four centuries old. So I think it's unwise
of us to conclude that there's some metaphysical need within society
for an institution like Journalism to exist.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #110 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:45

    
*What's more: much bigger changes in communication are coming, much
bigger than those we have already experienced.  They're not merely
economic changes about journalists getting health insurance and a
regular salary.   

*I can imagine a future situation where we don't even have "media." 
At least, no "medium" in that strict sense of some visible, distinctive
channel of communication.  

*I'll get a tad sci-fi here.  Suppose that the NSA was acquired by
Google, let's say, and suppose that Microsoft, Facebook, Apple and
Amazon pooled all their databanks, maybe through legislative fiat, or
through open-source…  And then we spiced-up that huge Cloud of Big
Data, with some massive real-time data flows from "smart cities" and
"wearables"…  And then we attacked that amorphous post-mediated mass
with Siri, and Watson, and such…  Well, that would no longer be
"media." That would be something very sci-fi, very "ubiquitous
computing," very pervasive and ambient.

*But it would also be what was just plain going on in real life.  We'd
be living inside all that, teaching with it, courting, preening
ourselves, all the usual stuff.

*Of course there would be some news within the fetid ambient mass
there, some new events would be happening that would properly be of
public interest.  But why would that be five hundred words of text, due
on Wednesday, with a byline?  That wouldn't make much sense, would it?
 You might as well write a sonnet about it.

*I'm not saying that this conjectured future situation would be
"better" than what we have today.  Likely a lot of the prized values of
Journalism, such as objectivity, relevance and fact-checking, might
take an ever worse beating than they already have.  But a situation
like that seems much more plausible to me than some return to the
status quo ante, journalism as it was taught to me by my professors in
journalism school in the late-middle 20th century.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #111 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:46

    
*My professors in my journalism school taught me a lot of useful
stuff, especially some period-methods of research, using the technology
of their day.  What I best recall from that education though, what
stuck with me through thick and thin, was some rather elaborate and
tortured ethical explanations from my professors, about why American
journalists have to be willing to go to jail to protect their sources. 


*You see, that activity was not written into the American legal code,
and it's certainly not in the Constitution.  It's actually a form of
ethical civil disobedience that journalists, as a profession, chopped
out of the background noise of American society. 

*This principled silence of journalists regarding sources is a
civilized species of mafia omertà, to tell the truth.  However, as a
journalist, your willingness to  silently make this personal sacrifice
is, in my opinion, how you know that you're really a "journalist." 
That's as opposed to some easy notion that you might, say, be a
"journalist" because you spread lots of ink on heaps of paper, or that
you're a "journalist" because you digitally chatter a lot to some big
audience about stuff that happened recently.

*Also: journalists tend to get shot a lot.  More than ever, lately.
Some bloggers get shot nowadays too, I grant them that, but especially
journalists get shot.  People who get shot are commonly segregated into
specialized social categories.  I'm thinking that time-honored custom
is likely to cling, somehow. 

*That differential treatment will likely remain whether "journalists"
have paywalls or not.  I'd point out that a lot of the warriors
shooting the journalists nowadays aren't getting any regular salaries,
either.  They fight, and they die for a cause, but they don't have
uniforms or flags or codes of military conduct.  Yet they're still very
active among us.  Terrorists who used to have armies and states: they
were created by the same contemporary social conditions as journalists
who used to have news magazines and analog TV networks.

*So as long as you morally behave as a "journalist," I reckon you can
still remain one somehow, despite the sources of revenue.  However,
even that condition isn't permanent.  

*For the profession of "journalism," one major threat of increased
surveillance is the demonstrated ability of the surveillors to defeat
the journalist's protection of the sources.  If there's no
confidentiality left in leakage to journalists, then a journalist is no
longer morally different from anybody else with a keyboard; he's like
a Catholic priest with no confessional booth.  Just another modern
problem among many new ones.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #112 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 14 02:48

    
*As a journalist, I'd love to say with Milton's Areopagitica that the
truth will win out.  As a novelist, I'd love to say that the word is
immortal and will outlast the trivial changes in our machinery and our
society.   

*But as a futurist, I know that neither of those things are true.  So
I can state here, and I'll do it right now:  these shibboleths about
Truth and literature are mere comforting fictions.  That is a seriously
inconvenient truth for us mere mortals -- but, well, that chilly,
Lovecraftian, a-theistic "all is vanity" chiding doesn't last within
people's minds.  

*So I can state that stuff -- I just did -- and people will read it,
too -- you just did -- and it's even true.  We all have the sheepish
feeling that we know it's really truly true, but so what?  We are
people, we are living and vital beings.  We forget that, and we go on
with the day's struggle.

*Someday the Sun will explode, and what about our journalism and
poetry then?  Well, so what? To hell with our exploding Sun.  We have
to do what we can do in the time we can act.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #113 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 14 05:24

    
Do we need novels?

http://www.washingtonpost.com/national/health-science/can-reading-a-novel-chan
ge-your-brain-a-study-of-brain-scans-suggest-yes/2014/01/06/171d9e6e-7163-11e3
-8b3f-b1666705ca3b_story.html

"After completing all nine sections of the novel, the participants
returned for five more mornings to undergo additional scans in a
resting state. The results showed heightened connectivity in the left
temporal cortex, an area of the brain associated with receptivity for
language, on the mornings following the reading assignments."

Do we need journalism?

* But why would that be five hundred words of text, due on Wednesday,
with a byline?

I think the answer here is related to the neural response to novels,
more broadly to stories. 

Your example of a large scale technology gathering and disseminating
facts doesn't work, because it's not facts we want, or pure
information. We want stories, in fact we need them to enhance those
cortical connections that arguably make us what we are, human and, as
human, social. (See Dunbar & the social brain hypothesis -
http://psych.colorado.edu/~tito/sp03/7536/Dunbar_1998.pdf) Storytellers
are essential to ongoing social and human evolution, and they feed
into something we all acknowledge, however unconsciously, as necessary
and important - not just wiring but sustaining and evolving those
connections within the brain without which we'd be zombified, or like
slugs with arms and legs. I suppose you could argue that journalism
could disappear or morph or whatever you've argued here, and as a
result those connections would whither or at least change and we would
lose or transform the "social being," but to me that's unlikely - the
drive to evolve as social rather than away from social is too great,
it's in the essence of human beings and human society. So I don't think
this Joe Friday future you've described (just the facts, ma'am) is
plausible. We need stories and we need the context and connections they
bring, and to have stories, we need storytellers.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #114 of 196: Alan L. Chamberlain (axon) Mon 13 Jan 14 11:11

    
Humans have been transmitting meaning through narrative for as long as
they've had language. Technology isn't changing that.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #115 of 196: backwoods charity-kitchen scullion (story) Mon 13 Jan 14 13:58

    
(bruces):"To hell with our exploding Sun.  We have to do what we can
do in the time we can act."

Thomas Nagel has an interesting review on Samuel Scheffler's "Death
and the Afterlife" [NYRB Jan 9 2014].  Both of these writers (and P.D.
James) have interesting takes on the likely effects of knowing that the
human stories were to be lost tomorrow.  However, I have a hard time
understanding why it matters whether the stories are written by
employed "Journalists" and members of a much-honored institution of
"Poetry."  Doesn't it put the cart before the horse to judge the health
of poetry or non-fiction writing by the renown and remuneration of
their contributors?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #116 of 196: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Mon 13 Jan 14 18:39

    
From Off Well reader ddodd:

I personally am a bit wary of the "narrative is essential for human
life" arguments, in that narrative ends up distorting a situation as
much as it represents it. I tend to take narrative as a widely used
tool for communication. Drawing on Lakoff and Johnson's argument about
metaphor being essential to human thought, narrative has the advantage
of structuring an event in forms that make the event metaphorical to
the structure of physical action. So narrative is a common and useful
metaphor in the same way as "inside" is a common and useful metaphor.


In other words, in the kind of communication environment that Bruce
described, narrative would exist, both in the form of teaching and of
gossip. But it wouldn't be the only tool for organizing the
information. For instance, lists have become ridiculously popular.
Dialogue/debate also seems to be a useful means of structuring
information on the net as well. In any case, both formats benefit more
immediately from hypertext capabilities than conventional journalistic
narrative or essays do.


I sort of see the most "advanced" forms of online communication being
those with a higher link/text ration. Those end up being fairly
difficult to join into though, which is where narrative proves more
valuable, a sort of gateway drug to more efficient communication.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #117 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 14 19:51

    
Bruce, my colleague Benjamin Bradley wanted to hear your take on the
potential of Distributed Autonomous Corporations.

Good defs & related links here: http://invictus-innovations.com/i-dac/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #118 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 01:24

    
*Here's a comprehensive list of the first authors who signed that
"petition against mass surveillance," and the countries they come from.

*This could be quite a handy checklist, if you're interested in novels
by foreigners, and you're looking for contemporary people who are
pretty much guaranteed to be clued-in.  I find this list exciting, it's
like discovering some cool writers' bar.  A lot of names I recognize,
but many more that I don't.

*Also, if you're a totalitarian secret policeman, you're gonna want to
round up all these literary dissidents, burn their books, and cut
their chatty, literary, informal lines of communication.  Good luck
with that.

*Here's a video of the original organizers, all sober and politically
committed, and sitting in at a press conference.  They're got kind of a
Teutonic WELLbeing look about 'em, if you ask me.




A STAND FOR DEMOCRACY IN THE DIGITAL AGE
Petition by Writers Against Mass Surveillance

First Signatories (by countries):


ALBANIA  Anila Wilms

ALGERIA  Boualem Sansal

ANGOLA  José Eduardo Agualusa

ARGENTINIA  Maria Teresa Andruetto, Edgardo Cozarinsky, María Sonia
Cristoff, Marcelo Figueras, Carlos Gamerro, Alberto Manguel, Guillermo
Martinez, Elsa Osorio, Claudia Piñeiro, Samanta Schweblin.

AUSTRALIA  Debra Adelaide, Chris Andrews, Venero Armanno, Larissa
Beherendt, James Bradley, Brian Castro, Nick Cave, Miriam Cosic,
Michelle de Kretser, Nick Earls, Delia Falconer, Anna Funder, Helen
Garner, Elisabeth Holdsworth, Linda Jaivin, Gail Jones, Evelyn Juers,
Thomas Keneally, Nam Le, James Ley, Angelo Loukakis, David Malouf,
Frank Moorhouse, Peter Rose, Rosie Scott, John Tranter, Kirsten
Tranter, Arnold Zable

AUSTRALIA/USA  Lily Brett, Geraldine Brooks. 

AUSTRIA  Olga Flor, Karl-Markus Gauß, Thomas Glavinic, Josef
Haslinger, Monika Helfer, Klaus Hoffer, Alois Hotschnig, Elfriede
Jelinek, Michael Köhlmeier, Eva Menasse, Robert Menasse, Robert
Pfaller, Doron Rabinovici, Kathrin Röggla, David Schalko, Robert
Schindel, Clemens J Setz, Marlene Streeruwitz, Peter Weibel, Josef
Winkler

AUSTRIA/GERMANY  Daniel Kehlmann

BANGLADESH  Ahmad Mostofa Kamal

BANGLADESH/UK  Tahmima Anam

BELARUS  Svetlana Alexievich

BELARUS/USA  Valzhyna Mort 

BELGIUM  Gie Bogaert, Saskia De Coster, Patrick De Rynck, Jozef Deleu,
Laurent Demoulin, Charles Ducal, Joris Gerits, Jos Geysels, Luuk
Gruwez, Thomas Gunzig, Peter Holvoet-Hanssen, Elisabeth Marain, Pierre
Mertens, Bart Moeyaert, Elvis Peeters, Erik Spinoy, Rik Torfs, Koen Van
Bockstal, Walter van den Broeck, Miriam Van hee, David van Reybrouck,
Annelies Verbeke, Paul Verhaeghe, Roel Verschueren, Erik Vlaminck,
Georges Wildemeersch

BELGIUM/FRANCE  Carl Norac

BELGIUM/NETHERLANDS  Joke van Leeuwen

BOSNIA  Miljenko Jergovic

BRAZIL  Marçal Aquino, Rafael Cardoso, Bernardo Carvalho, João Paulo
Cuenca, João Ubaldo Ribeiro, Luiz Ruffato, Paulo Scott

BULGARIA  Georgi Gospodinov

BULGARIA/UK  Kapka Kassabova

CAMEROON  Patrice Nganang

CANADA  Margaret Atwood, Ken Babstock, Cory Doctorow, Yann Martel,
Colin McAdam, Michael Ondaatje, John Ralston Saul, Madeleine Thien

CHILE  Carla Guelfenbein, Arturo Fontaine Talavera

CHILE/ARGENTINA/USA  Ariel Dorfman

CHILE/USA  Lina Meruane

CHINA  Liao Yiwu

COLOMBIA  Antonio Ungar, Héctor Abad, Oscar Collazos, Oscar
Guardiola-Rivera, Juan Gabriel Vásquez

CROATIA  Slavenka Drakulic, Nenad Popovic, Dubravka Ugrešic

CUBA  Leonardo Padura Fuentes

CUBA/SPAIN  Iván de la Nuez 

Cuba/USA  José Prieto

CZECH REP  Jaroslav Rudi

DENMARK  Niels Barfoed, Suzanne Brøgger, Tom Buk-Swienty, Peter H
Fogtdal, Katrine Marie Guldager, Iselin C Hermann, Peter Høeg, Sven
Holm, Hanne Vibeke Holst, Carsten Jensen, Pia Juul, Peter Øvig Knudsen,
Morten Kringelbach, Jørgen Leth, Ib Michael, Morten Ramsland, Morten
Sabroe, Pia Tafdrup, Janne Teller

DJIBOUTI  Abdourahman Waberi

ECUADOR  Francisco Proaño Arandi

EGYPT  Alaa al-Aswany, Nawal El Saadawi, Ahdaf Soueif

EGYPT/USA  Mona Eltahawy

EL SALVADOR  Horacio Castellanos Moya

FINLAND  Monika Fagerholm, Jarkko Tontti, Kjell Westö

FRANCE   Jean-Jacques Beineix, Céline Curiol, Marie Darrieussecq,
Philippe Djian, Lionel Duroy, Mathias Énard, Jérôme Ferrari, Anne-Marie
Garat, Laurent Gaudé, Pascale Hugues, Alban Lefranc , Roger Lenglet ,
Virginie Lou-Nony , Jean Mattern , Betty Mialet , Catherine Millet ,
Frédéric Mitterrand , Hélène Neveu Kringelbach , Philippe Pozzo di
Borgo , Flore Vasseur

FRANCE/CANADA  Martin Winckler

France/USA  Jonathan Littell

GERMANY  Friedrich Ani, Michael Augustin, Anke Bastrop, Ulrich Beck,
Artur Becker, Josef Bierbichler, Marica Bodroži´c, Mirko Bonné, Ralf
Bönt, Nora Bossong, Daniel Cohn-Bendit, Daniela Dahn, Liane Dirks,
Doris Dörrie, Ulrike Draesner, Kurt Drawert, Tanja Dückers, Carolin
Emcke, Sherko Fatah, David Finck, Julia Franck, Franziska Gerstenberg,
Christoph Giesa, Roman Graf, Günter Grass, Kerstin Grether, Annett
Gröschner, Gert Heidenreich, Christoph Hein, Thomas Hettche, Paul
Ingendaay, Steffen Kopetzky, Mareike Krügel, Michael Krüger, Michael
Kumpfmüller, Antje Kunstmann, Katja Lange-Müller, Benjamin Lauterbach,
Jo Lendle, Michael Lentz, Ulli Lust, Angelina Maccarone, Kristof
Magnusson, Sten Nadolny, Christiane Neudecker, Norbert Niemann, Ingo
Niermann, Markus Orths, Georg M Oswald, Inka Parei, Annette Pehnt,
Antje Rávic Strubel, Annika Reich, Moritz Rinke, Charlotte Roos, Eugen
Ruge, Peter Schneider, Erasmus Schöfer, Ingo Schulze, Hilal Sezgin,
Peter Sloterdijk, Tilman Spengler, Burkhard Spinnen, Ulrike Steglich,
Hans-Ulrich Treichel, Ilija Trojanow, Regula Venske, Marius von
Mayenburg, Thomas von Steinaecker, Gisela von Wysocki, Jan Wagner,
Alissa Walser, Theresia Walser, Florian Werner, Roger Willemsen, Ron
Winkler, Juli Zeh, Jan Christophersen

GHANA/USA  Kwame Dawes

GREECE  Kostas Akrivos , Petros Markaris, Amanda Michalopoulos,
Michailis Modinos, Nina Rapi, Thanassis Valtinos

HAITI/USA  Edwidge Danticat

HONG KONG/USA  Xu Xi Hong

HUNGARY  Tibor Babiczky, Zsófia Balla, Zsófia Bán, Báthori Csaba,
György Dragomán, Peter Esterhazy, Krisztián Grecsó, Noémi Kiss, László
Krasznahorkai, Lajos Parti Nagy, Anna T. Szabó

ICELAND  Björk, Oddný Eir, Einar Már Guðmundsson, Hallgrímur Helgason,
Bjarni Jónsson, Andri Snær Magnason, Steinnun Sigurðardóttir, Sjón,
Jón Kalman Stefánsson

INDIA  Shahid Amin, Amit Chaudhuri, Tishani Doshi, Naresh Fernandes,
Amitav Ghosh, Ramchandra Guha, Anjum Hassan, Ranjit Hoskoté, Raj Kamal
Jha, Anjali Joseph, Ruchir Joshi, Girish Karnad, Mukul Kesavan, Amitava
Kumar, Pankaj Mishra, Kiran Nagarkar, Jerry Pinto, Arundhati Roy,
Arundhati Subramaniam, Jeet Thayil, Altaf Tyrewala

INDIA/UK  Salil Tripathi, Suketu Mehta

IRAQ  Jabbar Yassin Hussin

IRAQ/FINLAND  Hassan Blasim

IRAQ/GERMANY  Najem Wali

IRELAND  Roddy Doyle, Colum McCann, Colm Tóibín

ISRAEL  Assaf Gavron, David Grossman, Etgar Keret, Yitzhak Laor, Sami
Michael, Amos Oz, Zeruya Shalev

ITALY  Andrea Bajani, Andrea de Carlo, Massimo Carlotto, Umberto Eco,
Erri de Luca, Paolo Giordano, Dacia Mariani

ITALY/AUSTRIA  Sabine Gruber

JAPAN  Tosihiko Uji, Jordan Elias Farkouh

LEBANON  Dominique Eddé

LEBANON/CANADA  Rawi Hage

LIBYA/EGYPT  Ahmed Fagih

LUXEMBOURG  Ranga Yogeshwar

MACEDONIA  Nikola Madzirov

MALAWI  Samson Kambalu 

MALAYSIA  Tan Twan Eng

MALTA  Pierre Mejlak

MEXICO  Rosa Beltrán, Sabina Berman, Carmen Boullosa, Ana Clavel, Alma
Guillermoprieto, Angeles Mastretta

NETHERLANDS  René Appel, Abdelkader Benali, Ronald Bos, Ian Buruma,
Gerrit Bussink, Saskia de Jong, Job Degenaar, Renate Dorrestein, Rudolf
Geel, Arnon Grünberg, Joke J Hermsen, Marjolin Hof, Tjitske Jansen,
Liesbeth Lagemaat, Thomas Lieske, Geert Mak, Nelleke Noordervliet,
Ester Naomi Perquin, Aleid Truijens, Manon Uphoff, Jan van Mersbergen,
Anne Vegter

NEW ZEALAND  Pip Adam, Tim Corballis, Nicky Hager, Ingrid Horrocks,
Lloyd Jones, Elizabeth Knox, Bill Manhire, Courtney Sina Meredith,
Sarah Quigley, Anna Sanderson, C. K. Stead

NEW ZEALAND/UK  Susan Pearce

NIGERIA  Helon Habila, Ben Okri, Chika Unigwe

NIGERIA/GERMANY  Olumide Popoola

NORWAY  Jostein Gaarder, Per Petterson

PAKISTAN  Mohsin Hamid, Ahmed Rashid

PAKISTAN/UK  Kamila Shamsie

PALESTINE  Suad Amiry, Mourid Barghouti, Najwan Darwish, Nathalie
Handal, Raja Shehadeh, Adania Shibli, Ghassan Zaqtan

PALESTINE/ISRAEL  Ala Hlehel

PERU  Santiago Roncagliolo

PHILIPPINES/CANADA  Miguel Syjuco

POLAND  Ignacy Karpowicz, Beata Stasi´cska, Witold Szab´cowski, Olga
Tokarczuk

PORTUGAL  Pedro Rosa Mendes

ROMANIA  Mircea Cartarescu

RUSSIA  Vladimir Aristov, Alan Cherchesov, Victor Erofeyev, Alisa
Ganiyeva, Dmitri Golynko, Alexander Ilichevsky, Sergei Lebedev,
Stanislav Lvovsky, Mikhail Shishkin, Alexander Skidan, Alexander
Snegiryov

SAMOA  Albert Wendt

SENEGAL  Cheikh Hamidou Kane

SERBIA  David Albahari

SERBIA/CROATIA  Bora ´Cosic

SLOVAKIA  Michal Hvorecký

SLOVENIA  Gabriela Babnik, Aleš Car, Aleš Debeljak, Mojca Kumerdej,
Miha Mazzini, Dušan Šarotar, Aleš Šteger

SOMALIA/SOUTH AFRICA  Nuruddin Farah

SOUTH AFRICA  Breyten Breytenbach, Antjie Krog, Zakes Mda, Margie
Orford, Henrietta Rose-Innes, Gillian Slovo, Ivan Vladislavi, Zukiswa
Wanner

SOUTH AFRICA/AUSTRALIA  JM Coetzee

SOUTH KOREA  Hwang Sok-Yong

SPAIN   Ricardo Bada, Javier Cercas, Rafael Chirbes, Juan Goytisolo,
Julio Llamazares, Javier Marías, Antonio Muñoz Molina, Rosa Montero,
Javier Salinas. 

SPAIN/GERMANY  José F A Oliver

SUDAN  Jamal Mahjoub

SWEDEN   Arne Dahl, Per Olov Enquist, Aris Fioretos, Jan Guillou,
Björn Larsson, Henning Mankell, Håkan Nesser, Tomas Tranströmer, Svante
Weyler

SWITZERLAND  Melinda Nadj Abonji, Sybille Berg, Peter Bieri, Irena
Brežná, Melitta Breznik, Iso Camartin, Alex Capus, Martin Dean, Catalin
Florescu, Christian Haller, Reto Hänny, Eveline Hasler, Franz Hohler,
Pedro Lenz, Charles Lewinsky, Klaus Merz, Julian Schütt, Peter Stamm,
Alain Sulzer, Urs Widmer

SYRIA  Hala Mohammed

TANZANIA/UK  Abdulrazak Gurnah

THAILAND/US  Rattawut Lapcharoensap

TUNISIA/FRANCE  Tahar Bekri

TURKEY  Yasar Kemal, Murathan Mungun, Orhan Pamuk, Buket Uzuner

UK   Akkas Al-Ali, Tariq Ali, David Almond, Martin Amis, Julian
Barnes, Priya Basil, John Berger, Jane Borodale, William Boyd, John
Burnside, Louis de Bernières, Isobel Dixon, Joanne Harris, Kazuo
Ishiguro, Pico Iyer, Stephen Kelman, Hari Kunzru, Ian McEwan, David
Mitchell, Stella Newman, Henry Porter, Martin Rowson, Manda Scott, Will
Self, Owen Sheers, Philip Sington, Tom Stoppard, Adam Thirwell, David
Vann, Nigel Warbuton, Irvine Welsh, Jeanette Winterson

UK/INDIA  Rana Dasgupta, Nikita Lalwani

UK/JORDAN   Fadia Faqir

UK/PAKISTAN  Hanif Kureishi

UK/US  Lionel Shriver

UKRAINE  Myroslav Marynovych, Oksana Zabuzhko

USA  John Ashbery, Paul Auster, Elise Blackwell, TC Boyle, Alexander
Chee, Isabel Fargo Cole, Billy Collins, Don DeLillo, Colin Dickey,
Jennifer Egan, Dave Eggers, Elizabeth Eslami, Richard Ford, Jorie
Graham, George Dawes Green, Joe Hurley, Elizabeth Kostova, Adrian
Nicole LeBlanc, Jonathan Lethem, Barry Lopez, Ben Marcus, Tyler
McMahon, Claire Messud, Josip Novakovich, George Packer, Tim Parrish,
Richard Powers, James Salter, Sapphire, Richard Sennett, Jane Smiley,
Anne Waldman, Alice Walker, Eliot Weinberger, Jeffrey Yang

USA/BOSNIA  Aleksandar Hemon

USA/China  Ha Jin

USA/ROMANIA  Domnica Radulescu

ZIMBABWE   Brian Chikwava, Peter Godwin
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #119 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 01:26

    
*Forgot the link to the video, here it is.

http://youtu.be/HmxO_jgOsz8

*Since they're German authors, don't expect a thrill a minute.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #120 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:35

    

*On the subject of writers, poets and their political activities, I
thought I'd say a little about Birgitta Jonsdottir.  She's a
cyberpunk-in-power; I follow her doings with grave interest.

*If you're somehow into the spectral idea of cyberpunks inside
city-hall, Birgitta Jonsdottir is the only politician I know of who is
really, really punk, and really, really cyber, and is actually a
legitimately elected public official.

*Birgitta's a member of the international Pirate Party.  Sort of. 
There are lots of Pirate Party affiliates who won elective office here
and there, but they don't seem to me to be quite so entirely "punk" as
Birgitta, who is your basic, black-clad, poetry-writing, Bjork-centric,
moony-eyed counterculture refusenik.

*If I myself were magically made the almighty dictator of a severely
repressive cyberpunk surveillance state, my sinister court of
black-clad Grand Councillors would be cram full of people like
Birgitta.  Our awesome regime would probably last about a week.  A
legendary week though… come on, imagine our uniforms.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #121 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:36

    
*Anyway, here's some Birgitta online memorabilia, for those who have
never heard about her.  I'm surprised Birgitta's not more famous than
she is.  You'd think there'd be an adoring Birgitta personality cult by
now, that she'd have, like, her own fashion line like Anna Chapman
does nowadays, or maybe the Birgitta Jonsdottir Wikileaks Fragrance. 
My guess is that she's been offered lots of that stuff, and she swiftly
gave it the rusty Viking pitchfork.

*Here I am in the front row while Birgitta's laying down some law in
Croatia.

http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/9347301072/
http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/9329913070/

*Birgitta speaking for herself:

http://joyb.blogspot.it

*Here's Birgitta being fictionally portrayed in a movie by a comely,
Nordic-looking actress from "Game of Thrones."  And why not, really.
However, Birgitta didn't like the resultant movie much.

https://buzcast.com/The-Fifth-Estate/57788181/Birgitta-J--nsd--ttir-Is-Being-P
layed-By-Carice-van-Houten

*Here's Birgitta's talking ideology, somewhat.

http://www.newrepublic.com/article/114845/interview-birgitta-jonsdottir-wikile
aks-fifth-estate

*And here's a summary of what happened to Iceland after its upheaval
of 2008.  

http://www.reconomy.org/the-icelandic-revolution-through-the-eyes-of-a-reconom
ist/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #122 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:37

    

*Birgitta's an '08er, basically.  She's a very honest, forthright,
street-smart punk dropout type, who reacted in indignant horror as her
nation rolled straight into the ditch.  She's a patriot, so she leapt
to her feet and was like: "Get the hell out of that drivers' seat!  I
couldn't do any worse if I just sat in there smoking clove cigarettes!"

*And when American intelligence services complain about her Internet
activities, surveilling her Twitter stream and so forth, she's like:
"Am I American? Get the hell out!  You call those 'secrets'?  They're
not secrets to me, Jack!"

*This behavior demonstrates the wisdom in having an alternative
society handy.  Normally punks and hippies are rather a drag, frankly:
they're sleazy, pretentious, long-haired pests with drug and attitude
problems; but then the day comes when there's some genuine, profound,
radical shock, and then everybody is like "Havel to the Castle!"  Then
Mr Alternative there is like a cultural fire-extinguisher.  It turns
out he can actually run stuff.  Sort of.  Barely.  He's like a spare
fuse, though.  Because it's him or the Darkness.  Much better him,
really, no kidding.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #123 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:38

    
*You will note from that report that most everything radical in
Iceland from 2008 has been tamped well back down now.  They tried a
whole lot of weird cyber-culture stuff in Iceland in 2008, most of it
was diffused, assimilated, defeated or ignored.

*Birgitta's still busy at the grinding wheel tossing sparks, but she
hasn't seen many signal political successes.  She was deeply involved
in Wikileaks, which was a radical social Internet innovation with some
radical social  real-life consequences.  Wikileaks was never the
smooth, subversive, bulletproof cypherpunk leak-machine that its
inventors had in mind.  Wikileaks blew up internally and externally,
and some of its participants are in hiding, or in the slammer, or in
Birgitta's case, stuck in a legislature.  

*But I don't blame her for that; not at all.  What you see is what you
get with Birgitta Jonsdottir.   The woman *is* a radical social
innovator, such is her nature, that is what she's all about.  I'd vote
for her.  For Austin City Council, for sure.  I think she'd be great in
my own home town.   For the Texas state legislature, I'd be 105%
Birgitta, because Texas is overrun by crazed anti-abortion fundies and
nutty armed Tea Party blowhards with gold bars; four or five Birgittas
in that legislative body would be like freakin' penicillin.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #124 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:39

    
*But to hear Birgitta tell the story -- and I was listening -- the
main difference between being an elected official and being a political
activist is that people return your phone calls.  She's constantly up
to radical actions she considers worthy -- trying to get Snowden
asylum, trying to turn Iceland into, I dunno, a volcanic-powered Green
encrypted open-source free-as-in-freedom Oz of some kind; and heck, I'd
go; if she pulled that off, I'd be on the first plane to Reykjavik. 
But, it's real politics and it's not science fiction, so Birgitta's
spending valuable years of her mortal lifespan devoted to her cause. 

*It's 2014 not 2008, and Julian's still stuck in the embassy;  she's
personally tired of him, anyway.   Birgitta's not a fierce,
power-hungry apparatchik by her nature.  I get the strong impression
that she'd  much rather be chewing her pencil stub and laying down some
heartfelt Icelandic poetry, but, well, it can be rather easier to get
some power than it is to put it aside.

*By the traditional historical standard of Icelandic poet-politicians,
our Birgitta is quite a mild, polite, civilized person.   She's a
global force for goodness, even -- at least, by comparison.   Check
this guy out, Iceland's greatest poet-politician ever.  Got chopped up
with an axe in a basement.

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snorri_Sturluson
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #125 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 02:48

    
*I woke up in Turin this morning to discover, to my grave surprise and
everyone else's, that the city council of Turin just voted to legalize
marijuana.

*Naturally, since this is Italy, and it's also marijuana, it's got
about a million bureaucratic Catch-22s in it, like, to legally blow
some weed you'll need a glaucoma prescription and you need to stand on
your head on alternate Tuesdays while practicing yoga with an
air-cleanser and an ambulance standing by.  Whatever.  It's Turin, the
first city in Italy to ever try a scheme like that.

*That's very 2014, folks.  I happen to dwell within  Turin's San
Salvario party district, so if this works out, it's gonna be Amsterdam
and Denver in the streets below.

http://youtu.be/9eLq0HZTds4
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #126 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 14 04:56

    
I'm posting on the run because I'm having a Busy Week. I'm all about
stacking things up and getting them done lately - as many of my peers
are winding down into some sort of "retirement," I find myself charging
along like a twentysomething, but a little smarter than I was 40 years
ago, having learned, finally, from my experiences. 

Yesterday I visited Capital Factory, an incubator/co-working facility
founded and operated by my friend Josh Baer, a brilliant young guy who
founded something like six successful companies, made tons of money,
and decided to give back to the budding creative entrepreneurial
community of Austin. Austin attracts all sorts of people who can't
abide high-paying corporate tech jobs because they're so dull and
constraining. We talked to some guys like that - technically brilliant,
totally committed to building their own thing on their own terms, and
having real fun in the process. Their idea of fun is living in Austin,
going to all the area festivals, experiencing the hot and cold running
culture of music, film, and gonzo business initiatives. Watching
hundreds of these guys bustle around the huge and growing Capital
Factory turf, I realized I was sitting the big middle of the future of
business. It had a terrific vibe, I'd never seen anything quite like
it.

I find myself wondering, hopefully, what kind of world we'll have if
and when some subset of these hard-working geeks turn their attention
to politics. One of Texas' best legislators in recent years, Mark
Strama, was an example: he'd come from the tech business sector, was
clueful about technology, knew how to get things done. Like so many his
age (probably thirties or forties) and younger, he was socially and
politically ept, absent of angst, working to be of service as one of
the few progressives in the Texas lege - a thankless task, I can hardly
imagine it. He's no longer a legislator, Google hired him to help them
into Austin in a bigger way.

The stacks are moving into Austin, growing their presence here,
because it's a business-friendly environment, costs are low, creativity
is manifest everywhere: we say "keep Austin weird" and we mean it.
Google's saying "keep Austin wired," bringing its high-bandwidth fiber
into play here. The city's bustling. Someone said yesterday that he'd
gone back to his hometown, I think it was Duluth, and could hardly
imagine the economic despair of the place - because there's no such
despair in Austin. I wouldn't say that money is flowing here in a Wall
Street/Las Vegas sense of wealth, but incomes are okay, and okay is
enough for people I meet here. They're not thinking big house and car,
they're thinking shorter work weeks and and annual visits to ACLFest
and SXSW, fine dining and craft mixology, films at the Alamo Drafthouse
and massive infusions of alt culture. They're not political yet, but
just wait.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #127 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 14 08:44

    
Quick note about the platform for this conversation, the WELL.

The WELL is a system of forums that have been ongoing now for almost
30 years - it's a seminal online community and a major influence on the
social evolution of the Internet and the web.

The WELL is still active after 30 years, and was recently purchased by
some of its members, after years of ownership by various organizations
or individuals, including Point Foundation (which published the Whole
Earth Catalog, and founded the WELL), Bruce Katz, and most recently
Salon.com. This is still a great place for the kinds of conversation
you're reading here - in depth conversation, not the drive-by kind
encouraged by shorter uncategorized forms of messaging as on Twitter
and Facebook. (The most comparable latter day platform is Reddit.)

The WELL is supported by memberships - as little as $10/month for
quality conversation (http://www.well.com/nu_reg.html). I thought we
should post this plug for the WELL, which is a great place to hang out;
Bruce and I have been members for over two decades, and we're still
here. More info at http://www.well.com/aboutwell.html.

Now back to our regularly scheduled programming, in progress...
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #128 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Tue 14 Jan 14 10:43

    
wasn't there a tagline 'a thoughtful place in cyberspace'?

meatier than meatspace.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #129 of 196: David Gans (tnf) Tue 14 Jan 14 11:36

    

"A peaceful place in Cyberspace" is a takeoff on a Grateful Dead lyric.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #130 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Tue 14 Jan 14 12:09

    
ahh, peaceful!  after a fashion.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #131 of 196: David Gans (tnf) Tue 14 Jan 14 12:31

    

The Grateful Dead line is "A peaceful place, or so it looks from space / A
closer look reveals the human race..."

And a Deadhead-owned business in upstate New York used the tag line "A pizza
place, or so it looks from space."

I'm finished now.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #132 of 196: John Coate (tex) Tue 14 Jan 14 13:30

    
And now the end of just about any hope for net neutrality, not that I
held out much hope for it at this point.  The FCC never would rule that
data should be regulated as a common carrier, so a Federal Appeals
Court has ruled today that they can't then regulate data carriers as if
they are common carriers.  Thus, net neutrality is pretty officially
dead as a concept.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #133 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 14 14:15

    
The Legacy Internet was a creature of the Personal Computer.

http://www.wired.com/business/2014/01/death-pc-also-mean-end-web/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #134 of 196: Robin Elliott (robinellt) Tue 14 Jan 14 19:12

    
First let me say thanks for the stimulating discussion. I liked it so
much I decided to sign up.

(jonl): you mentioned a feeling of distraction that comes after too
much time spent online. Unsurprisingly, it's the same exact thing as
happens with novels, there's a neurological component to it. Phil
Zimbardo at Stanford brought it up in a TED talk: 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oVEHeY8sY5Q (he gets into it at about
2:50)

He calls it an arousal addiction, and describes it as a craving for
constantly novel stimuli that produce dopamine spikes.  The good news
is that the effects seem to wear off in short order once behaviour
changes.

It puts the Transhumanist debate in a different light, I think. Every
piece of technology we have that changes our experience of the world
reaches into our biology as well, even the non-electronic ones. Not
that I'm cheerleading for wholesale alterations to our species. Quite
the contrary, since we've been doing it for some time already, I think
it's less of a messiah than some might assume.

That said, and this is just a guess, in 2014 we'll hear a lot of
overly positive talk about integrating tech into our lives. Are the
wearables that were hot at CES this year a gateway drug to implants?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #135 of 196: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 15 Jan 14 01:11

    
Any thoughts on dogecoin? The redditors seem quite cheerful.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #136 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 14 05:10

    
All your dogecoins are belong to us! The whimsical approach to
cryptocurrency might just be the best, and it's certainly time for a
revival of Comic sans. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #137 of 196: David Gans (tnf) Wed 15 Jan 14 07:36

    

Thank you for joining us, Robin!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #138 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 14 09:59

    
Robin, great points in your post. However I don't think I was talking
about distraction, but fragmentation of attention. 

I do see distraction as an issue; as Mr. Gurdjieff noted, we're asleep
in a sense when we get into the complete identification that the term
"distraction" would imply. That can be an issue if you don't want to be
asleep, though many would prefer a perpetual snooze, the default
condition - no struggle to be more aware. And there's no need to be
more aware in that sense, unless that's what you really want.

But whether you're "asleep" or "awake," I think the constant dramatic
shifts in context that we experience online are destabilizing.

I'm still thinking about your question re. wearables. I'm not
personally drawn to something like Google Glass, but I might dig a
FitBit. How transformative might that be, that constant monitoring of
the body? Would that make me want something more deeply implanted?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #139 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 14 12:59

    
We were prophetic when we discussed the end of the Internet:
http://billmoyers.com/2014/01/15/door-closes-to-open-internet-but-all-may-not-
be-lost/

Craig Aaron: "... [the] ruling means that Internet users will be
pitted against the biggest phone and cable companies — and in the
absence of any oversight, these companies can now block and
discriminate against their customers’ communications at will… They’ll
establish fast lanes for the few giant companies that can afford to pay
exorbitant tolls and reserve the slow lanes for everyone else." 

@TomWheelerFCC responded with a statement that suggests he doesn't see
a problem: 

“The D.C. Circuit has correctly held that ‘Section 706 . . . vests
[the Commission] with affirmative  authority to enact measures
encouraging the deployment of broadband infrastructure’ and therefore
may  ‘promulgate rules governing broadband providers’ treatment of
Internet traffic.’ I am committed to maintaining our networks as
engines for economic growth, test beds for innovative services and
products, and channels for all forms of speech protected by the First
Amendment. We will consider all available options, including those for
appeal, to ensure that these networks on which the Internet depends
continue to provide a free and open platform for innovation and
expression, and operate in the interest of all Americans.” 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #140 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 14 13:00

    
That Craig Aaron quote is not from the article linked, but from this
HuffPo piece:
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/craig-aaron/net-neutrality-is-dead-he_b_4596355.
html
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #141 of 196: David Swedlow (dswedlow) Wed 15 Jan 14 14:21

    
Chris, Jon posted my thoughts which included distraction and
transhumanism. Inspired by you and Jon, and in shoring up the free (as
in speech) web, I am now a member as WELL.

Wearables and interfaces. Following one of the Wired articles above, I
saw the one about future interfaces possibly being more inspired by
"Her" than "Minority Report"
(http://www.wired.com/design/2014/01/will-influential-ui-design-minority-report
/),
and also watched the Tiffany Shlain video
(http://letitripple.org/brainpower/) which is right in line with your
thought about how we are modifying the species and thus the planet.

I think a lot about what I want in terms of service and intention
fulfillment, and how I increasingly am presented with influence and
coercion, especially the subtle, can-hardly-detect-it variety. I can
see that awareness of this is growing more wide-spread. A very good
thing. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #142 of 196: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 15 Jan 14 21:44

    
I'm not sure coercion is quite the right word. Nobody makes you
obsessively check your Facebook/Twitter/G+ account. It's more like
aggressive nudging.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #143 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 14 00:53

    
*So, I wonder if some other nation is going to *insist* on net
neutrality, and then go whizzing straight into libertarian ecstasies of
free, wealth-creating, technical innovation.  I mean, surely that
approach oughta work…  unless you think that the dot com boom was just
a lucky historical accident.

*Meanwhile, with the incipient FoxNewsification of the American
Internet service providers, well, that ought to play right into the
hands of alternative entities like the WELL.   Under these new
conditions, with the fast-lane wholly-owned by opaque, ultra-rich
corporate malefactors, somebody's gonna WANT to be in slow lane.  

*You can get things done, in the slow lane.  Yessirree.  Why, I can
remember when one used to log on to the WELL BBS, and those arcane,
slow-lane, little-known techno-hippies were just about the only public
entities who knew anything about how phone networks functioned.  

*Maybe you could get one of these snazzy, haywire, mostly
design-fiction "blackphones" in 2014, and then be among the lucky,
early-adapter few who owns a phone that behaves like all phones used to
behave.

http://vimeo.com/84167384

*And you know what else might be great nowadays?  A "personal"
computer!  Just for you!  No broadband, no wiretaps, no involuntary
upgrades to your operating system…  No sociality…  Just like, a
*general-purpose" computing device, but created for the independent
individual!  

*Maybe you guys could get some kind of Californian club of enthusiasts
together, and make one of those gizmos out of wood!  It's 2014 now,
don't let me stop you!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #144 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 14 01:13

    

*So, I'm off to Berlin presently, where the locals will be glumly
celebrating our ensuing digital Dark Age under the iron heel of
American terror-spook oppression.  It's me and cheery ol' Evgeny
Morozov, over in the Rosa Luxemburg Platz, in the rapidly gathering
shadows of the cyber-Götterdämmerung.  Be sure to bring popcorn and
glowsticks.


http://www.kulturstiftung-des-bundes.de/cms/en/sparten/wort_und_wissen/einbruc
h_der_dunkelheit.html


*In celebration of this Berlin trip, I went to the trouble to whip up
some brief profiles of the Berlin-centric, writerly organizers of the
"Petition Against Mass Surveillance."  They really seem like a nice set
of people.  Charming people, even, although they may be a tad
slow-lane, still picking the lint off the ribbons of their manual
typewriters.

*I'd like to get to know them better, in 2014.  I'm thinking there
might even be a potential science fiction anthology here, given that
some of them are known to write science fiction.  Somebody's got to
cash in on all this eager literary activism, so why can't it be, um,
Amazon?  They like books!

*I'm a little surprised that some with-it social network didn't pick
all these activists out of the background noise, and offer them to me
on a platter.  Because I'd never heard of most of 'em, until the NSA's
scandals rustled 'em up.  Could it be that those efficient, well-heeled
social-networks are not really in the business of finding your friends
for you?



http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/organizers-of-the-petition-agai
nst-mass-surveillance-josef-haslinger/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/organizers-of-the-petition-agai
nst-mass-surveillance-priya-basil/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/organizers-of-the-petition-agai
nst-mass-surveillance-janne-teller/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/organizers-of-the-petition-agai
nst-mass-surveillance-eva-menasse/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/organizers-of-the-petition-agai
nst-mass-surveillance-juli-zeh/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/petition-against-mass-surveilla
nce-organizers-iliya-trojanow/

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/2014/01/american-translator-isabel-farg
o-cole-writes-about-her-role-in-the-petition-against-mass-surveillance/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #145 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 14 06:14

    
We haven't talked much in this year's SOTW about war, plague, or
famine. I suspect that's because those are such rare conditions lately.
Sure, we have terrorists and pockets of war globally all the time, but
nothing like the great wars of the 20th century (knock on wood). The
world's about as peaceful and civilized as it gets. We've learned to
abstract and virtualize our wars, limiting loss of life, limb, and
whole cities. We do have soldiers fighting, limbs blown off by IEDs in
the Middle East, but they're tragic exceptions, at least for now.

We hear persistent rumors that global pandemic is inevitable. This
morning I read that the ninth victim of this year's flu season had died
in Austin, but all nine of those who've died had "underlying
conditions" that compromised their resistance... and the numbers of
cases of flu each year, while higher than they should be given
availability of flu vaccines, haven't been epidemic (i.e. haven't been
outside statistical prediction). 

It's meaningful that the greatest health anxiety some of us in Texas
have experienced was over mosquito-borne West Nile virus summer before
last, and West Nile isn't even symptomatic 80% of the time. In 2012
Texas had 1868 cases with 89 deaths; we were dodging mosquitoes as
though they were demons arrived to hauls us all down to hell - but
those numbers, while by definition epidemic, were mercifully low
relative to the population.

In the USA and I suspect in much of the world, we humans are healthy
and resilient, and well-cared-for despite the volume of complaints
about the medical establishment. We do have real problems, e.g. growing
instances of hospital-acquired infections and antibiotic resistance.
Are we done with antibiotics? If you take a close look, you'll find
that the lack of effective antibiotics is linked to market realities
for pharmaceutical companies. Antibiotics are not as profitable as
drugs that treat nagging but nonfatal issues (like erectile
dysfunction), so antibiotic research isn't prevalent as it should be.
But there is some research, and promising new antibiotics are in
development. (e.g.
http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2013/04/16/cid.cit152.full)

Last night at the gym, as I watched the ruddy good health of the
dozens of Austinites running in place on various ellipticals and
treadmills, pandemic seemed unlikely. Perhaps some level of health
anxiety is the best prevention - as long as we're thinking about it,
talking about it, preparing for it
(http://www.flu.gov/pandemic/about/), it's less likely to happen. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #146 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 14 07:12

    
David Swedlow mentions "...influence and coercion, especially the
subtle, can-hardly-detect-it variety."

Marketing is ever more sophisticated and subtle, often ambient,
subliminal, "sneaky." As you say, we're more aware that this is
happening - but we need empowering approaches and technologies, e.g.
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/projectvrm/Main_Page - VRM = "vendor
relationship management"

VRM goals:

1) Provide tools for individuals to manage relationships with
organizations. These tools are personal. That is, they belong to the
individual in the sense that they are under the individual's control.
They can also be social, in the sense that they can connect with others
and support group formation and action. But they need to be personal
first.

2) Make individuals the collection centers for their own data, so that
transaction histories, health records, membership details, service
contracts, and other forms of personal data are no longer scattered
throughout a forest of silos.

3) Give individuals the ability to share data selectively, without
disclosing more personal information than the individual allows.

4) Give individuals the ability to control how their data is used by
others, and for how long. At the individual's discretion, this may
include agreements requiring others to delete the individual's data
when the relationship ends.

5) Give individuals the ability to assert their own terms of service,
reducing or eliminating the need for organization-written terms of
service that nobody reads and everybody has to "accept" anyway.

6) Give individuals means for expressing demand in the open market,
outside any organizational silo, without disclosing any unnecessary
personal information.

7) Make individuals platforms for business by opening the market to
many kinds of third party services that serve buyers as well as
sellers.

8) Base relationship-managing tools on open standards and open APIs
(application program interfaces). This will support a rising tide of
activity that will lift an infinite variety of business boats plus
other social goods.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #147 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 14 00:23

    
*So, Netflix managed to rig the Internet's software in order to favor
its intellectual-property interests…  Only to see its business model
promptly wrecked by the annihilation of net-neutrality?  What a tough
life they have!

*What is that like?  I hate to get all poetic and authorly here, but
it's rather like watching a dung beetle fly into a lovely dew-soaked
spiderweb, wrecking the web utterly, and then dying slowly and
piteously of starvation, as it's suspended in mid-air by its filthy
legs, twisting, twisting slowly on one long, gooey cable.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #148 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 14 00:50

    
*People who have persisted this long within the WELL SOTW 2014
probably think I do nothing all year but darkly obsess about the arcane
implications of current events.

*That is only partially true, though.  When I'm left to my own
creative devices, I quite like to write about the State of the World
during *radicallly different time periods.*

*For instance, this is my most recently published work of fiction:
it's called "Pilgrims of the Round World."  "Pilgrms of the Round
World" is entirely about the 'state of the world' -- there's
globalization at work on most ever interminable page.  However, it's
all about the State of the World in the year 1463 AD.

*And it's set here in Turin, of course, because where else.

http://subterraneanpress.com/magazine/winter_2014/pilgrims_of_the_round_world_
by_bruce_sterling

*"Pilgrims of the Round World"  is one of those peculiar fits of
world-building erudition endemic to the science fiction genre.  I look
at material like this, created by other, similar science fiction
writers, and I'm like:  "What possible reader could find any pleasure
in this stuff?  This story is  all about the Pope of the elves and the
elves of the Pope!  You'd need a spreadsheet just to name and number
the characters!  This is not even 'literature,' it's like 'World of
Warcraft,' only desiccated into black and white!"

*But I wrote this novella anyway, and I'm kind of glad it's been
published… because that means I'm FREE of it, somehow.  One has to love
the world in order to appreciate its change of states.  It's  an act
of "amor mundi" really… though it's an abstract and platonic love,
because no modern will ever  embrace the world of 1463 AD.  About all
one can do is to express that love…  just admit it publicly, find some
way to declare one's overwrought feelings, like some sleazebag
troubadour addressing a remote lady in a tumbledown castle.  Then,
somehow, one is liberated.

*Until you feel the need to write another one, that is.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #149 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 14 06:28

    
*What rich guys fret about in Davos.  Those seem particularly lame
this year.  Aren't 1, 4, 7, 9 and 10 basically the same thing with five
different names?


Ten Global Risks of Highest Concern in 2014 (World Economic Forum)
1 Fiscal crises in key economies
2 Structurally high unemployment/underemployment
3 Water crises
4 Severe income disparity
5 Failure of climate change mitigation and adaptation
6 Greater incidence of extreme weather events (e.g. floods, storms,
fires)
7 Global governance failure
8 Food crises
9 Failure of a major financial mechanism/institution
10 Profound political and social instability
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #150 of 196: Morgan Rowe-Morris (rowemorris) Fri 17 Jan 14 06:41

    <scribbled>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #151 of 196: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 17 Jan 14 06:44

    
Well, from that list, I'd say I have much in common with the rich
folks at Davos, at least where worries are concerned.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #152 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 14 07:35

    
Though you have to acknowledge a difference in perspective. The folks
who meet at Davos can arguable *do something* about those concerns. We
all share their probably interminable list of concerns (what Bruce
posted was only a top ten list, since focus ain't infinite). However
they can move money and power where it matters, like the human body's
physical center clustering white blood cells around infection.

Here in Texas we should be focused on water crises:
http://www.mystatesman.com/news/news/local/inflows-to-highland-lakes-second-lo
west-on-record/ncrLY/
 However in Austin we're more focused on the most pressing problem -
the air is fairly toxic with 1,794 grains per cubic meter of cedar (aka
juniper) pollen. At least we're not living in the San Joaquin Valley,
where dust in the air is even more toxic, as in potentially fatal:
http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2014/01/20/140120fa_fact_goodyear. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #153 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 14 08:02

    
*Well, here comes another "petition against mass surveillance," this
one apparently surfacing first in Amsterdam rather than Berlin.

*2014 is Spook, Spook, Spook Country, folks.



Academics Against Mass Surveillance

Last summer it was revealed, largely thanks to Edward Snowden, that
American and European intelligence services are engaging in mass
surveillance of hundreds of millions of people.

Intelligence agencies monitor people's Internet use, obtain their
phone calls, email messages, Facebook entries, financial details, and
much more. Agencies have also gathered personal information by
accessing the internal data flows of firms such as Google and Yahoo.
Skype calls are "readily available" for interception. Agencies have
purposefully weakened encryption standards - the same techniques that
should protect our online banking and our medical files. These are just
a few examples from recent press reports. In sum: the world is under
an unprecedented level of surveillance.

This has to stop.

The right to privacy is a fundamental right. It is protected by
international treaties, including the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights.
Without privacy people cannot freely express their opinions or seek and
receive information. Moreover, mass surveillance turns the presumption
of innocence into a presumption of guilt. Nobody denies the importance
of protecting national security, public safety, or the detection of
crime. But current secret and unfettered surveillance practices violate
fundamental rights and the rule of law, and undermine democracy.

The signatories of this declaration call upon nation states to take
action. Intelligence agencies must be subjected to transparency and
accountability. People must be free from blanket mass surveillance
conducted by intelligence agencies from their own or foreign countries.
States must effectively protect everyone's fundamental rights and
freedoms, and particularly everyone's privacy.

January 2014
Signatories

If you are an academic and you would like to sign the declaration,
please email us at 
info (at) academicsagainstsurveillance.net 
with your name, academic function and university in the subject line. 


 Ian Brown (Associate Director of Oxford University's Cyber Security
Centre)
 Douwe Korff (Professor International Law, London Metropolitan
University)
 Serge Gutwirth (Professor of Human Rights, Comparative law, Legal
Theory and Methodology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Bart Jacobs (Professor of Software Security and Correctness, Radboud
University Nijmegen)
 Bert-Jaap Koops (Professor Regulation & Technology, Tilburg
University)
 Roger Clarke (Visiting Professor, Faculty of Law, UNSW and Research
School of Computer Science, ANU)
 Roger Brownsword (Professor of Law, King's College London)
 Bruce Schneier (Fellow, Berkman Institute for Internet and Society,
Harvard Law School)
 Katherine Strandburg (Alfred B. Engelberg Professor of Law, New York
University)
 Dirk Helbing (Professor of Sociology, in particular of Modeling and
Simulation, ETH Zurich)
 Ulrich Beck (Professor of Sociology, University of Munich and London
School of Economics)
 David Lyon (Professor, Queen's Research Chair in Surveillance
Studies, Queen's University)
 Yves Poullet (Professor of Law, University of Namur)
 Colin Benett (Professor, Department of Political Science, University
of Victoria)
 Joel Reidenberg (Visiting Professor, Princeton University; Stanley D.
and Nikki Waxberg Chair in Law, Fordham University)
 Mary deYoung (Professor, Department of Sociology, Grand Valley State
University)
 Catherine Dwyer (Associate Professor, Seidenberg School of Computer
Science & Information Systems, Pace University)
 Anne-Lise Sibony (Professor of European Law, University of Liége)
 Laurent de Sutter (FWO Senior Researcher, Free University Brussels;
Visiting Honorary Research Scholar, Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law)
 Jay Rosen (Associate Professor of Journalism, New York University)
 Marc Rotenberg (Adjunct Professor, Georgetown University Law Center)
 Peggy Valcke (Professor in Law, KU Leuven)
 Sarah Spiekermann (Professor for Information Systems, Vienna
University of Economics and Business)
 Barbara Fister (Professor, Library, Gustavus Adolphus College)
 Oscar Gandy (Emeritus Professor Communication studies, Annenberg
School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania)
 Leonhard Grill (Professor for Physical Chemistry, University of Graz)
 Wolfgang Hofkirchner (Associate Professor, Vienna University of
Technology)
 Antonius Kies (Project Assistant, Institute for ICE and
Thermodynamics, TU Graz)
 Ludo Abicht (Professor Department of International Relations,
University of Antwerp)
 Daniel de Beer (Researcher, Research Group on Law Science Technology
& Society, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Jenneke Christiaens (Professor of Law and Criminology, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel)
 Laurence Claeys (Assistant Professor of Communication Sciences, Free
University Brussels)
 Eric Corijn (Professor Social and Cultural Geography, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel)
 Tom Daems (Lecturer in Criminology and Sociology of Law, Ghent
University)
 Jonas Degrave (Ph.D Researcher, Department of Electronics and
Information Systems, Ghent University)
 Marie-Sophie Devresse (Professor of Law, Université catholique de
Louvain)
 Claudia Diaz (Assistant Professor Computer Security and Industrial
Cryptography, KU Leuven)
 Els Dumortier (Professor Department of Criminology, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel)
 Veerle Draulans (Associate Professor, KU Leuven)
 Gloria Gonzalez Fuster (Researcher, Research Group on Law Science
Technology & Society, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Paul de Hert (Professor, Criminal Law, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Diete Humblet (Ph.D Researcher, Department of Criminology, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel)
 Dan Kaminski (Professor of Criminology, Université catholique de
Louvain)
 Joachim Koops (Professor of International Affairs, Vesalius College,
Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Margo de Koster (Professor of Historical Criminology, Vrije
Universiteit Brussel)
 Laurens Lavrysen (Ph.D Researcher, Human Rights Centre, Ghent
University)
 Hans Lammerant (Researcher, Research Group on Law Science Technology
& Society, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Koen Lefever (Lecturer at Vesalius College, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel)
 Philippe Mary (Professor of Criminology, Université Libre de
Bruxelles)
 Saïla Ouald Chaib (Ph.D researcher, Human Rights Centre, Ghent
University)
 Paul Ponsaers (Emeritus Professor, Ghent University)
 Anna Leander (Professor (MSO), Department of Management, Politics and
Philosophy, Copenhagen Business School)
 Bart Preneel (Professor of Information Security, KU Leuven)
 Wolfgang Stein (Professor of Neurophysiology, Illinois State
University)
 Markus Thiel (Assistant Professor; Acting Co-director, EU Center of
Excellence Department of Politics & International Relations School of
International & Public Affairs, Florida International University)
 Justus Verhagen (Associate Fellow, The John B. Pierce Laboratory;
Associate Professor, Department of Neurobiology, Yale School Of
Medicine)
 Bertrand Renard (Visiting Professor, Law and Criminology, Université
catholique de Louvain)
 Herwig Reynaert (Professor & Dean, Faculty of Political and Social
Sciences, Ghent University)
 Antoinette Rouvroy (FNRS Research Associate, Research Centre
Information, Law and Society, University of Namur)
 Bart de Schutter (Emeritus Professor of Law, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel)
 Olivier de Schutter (Professor, Université catholique de Louvain)
 Antoinette Verhage (Postdoc Researcher, Department of Criminal Law
and Criminology; Director Institute for Urban Security & Policing
Studies, Ghent University)
 Gert Vermeulen (Professor of International and European criminal law,
Ghent University)
 Dirk Voorhoof (Professor of Media Law, Ghent University)
 Isabelle Wattier (Assistant Professor, Faculty of Law and
Criminology, Université catholique de Louvain)
 David Wright (Managing Partner, Trilateral Research, London;
Researcher, Free University Brussels)
 Jennifer Barrigar (Professor, Law & Legal Studies, Carleton
University)
 Greg Elmer (Professor of Media, Ryerson University)
 Heather Morrison (Assistant Professor, School of Information Studies,
University of Ottawa)
 David Murakami Wood (Canada Research Chair (Tier II) in Surveillance
Studies; Associate Professor, Department of Sociology, Queen's
University)
 Robert Park (Professor and Associate Dean of Arts, Computing,
University of Waterloo)
 Valerie Steeves (Associate Professor of Criminology, University of
Ottawa)
 Roel Vertegaal (Professor of Human-Computer Interaction, Queen's
University)
 Michael Fellhauer (Associate Professor, Department of Astronomy,
University of Concepcion)
 Peter Blume (Professor of Data Protection Law, University of
Copenhagen)
 Thomas Heimburg (Associate Professor, The Niels Bohr Institute,
University of Copenhagen)
 Carsten Bagge Laustsen (Associate Professor, Department of Political
Science and Government, Aarhus University)
 Wouter De Tavernier (PhD researcher, Department of Political Science,
Aalborg University)
 Kai Kimppa (Post-Doctoral Researcher of IT and Ethics Turku School of
Economics, University of Turku)
 Alberto Alemanno (Jean Monnet Professor of EU Law & Risk Regulation,
HEC Paris; Global Clinical Professor, New York University)
 Emma Bell (Senior Lecturer, University of Savoie)
 Didier Bigo (Director of the Centre d' etudes sur les Conflits, la
Liberté, la Sécurité; Professor Department of War Studies King's
College London; Research professor (MCU) Sciences Po Paris)
 Roberto Di Cosmo (Professor of Computer Science, University Paris
Diderot)
 Paul Egré (Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, Visiting
Assistant Professor, New York University)
 Rafael Munagorri (Professor of Law, Université de Nantes)
 Gloria Origgi (Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique and
EHESS, Paris)
 Philippe Schlenker (Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique,
Global Distinguished Professor, New York University)
 Anastassia Tsoukala (Associate Professor Criminology, University of
Paris XI)
 Marion Albers (Professor of Public Law, Information and Communication
Law, Health law and Theory of Law, Hamburg University)
 Maria Beimborn (International Center for Ethics in Sciences and
Humanities, University of Tübingen)
 Christian Berndt (Professor of Marine Geophysics,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel)
 Roland Bless (Associate Professor, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology)
 Ralf Bieber (Researcher, Ruprecht-Karls-University)
 Franziska Boehm (Assistant Professor for IT-Law, University of
Münster)
 Rainer Böhme (Professor of IT Security, University of Münster)
 Gerhard Dannemann (Professor, Centre for British Studies,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin)
 Jens Dittrich (Professor of Computer Science: Data Management and Big
Data; Saarland University)
 Michael Friedewald (Head of ICT Research Unit, Fraunhofer Institute
for Systems and Innovation Research)
 Klaus David (Professor, Chair for Communication Technology,
University of Kassel)
 Markus Deimann (Assistant Professor, FernUniversität in Hagen)
 Jeroen Dickschat (Professor of Organic Chemistry, Technical
University of Braunschweig)
 Roy Baker (Lecturer, Macquarie Law School, Macquarie University)
 Angela Daly (Research Fellow, Swinburne University of Technology)
 Jessica Heesen (Research Associate, Interdepartmental Centre for
Ethics in the Sciences and Humanities, University of Tübingen)
 Petra Hiller (Professor of Organization and Governance, Nordhausen
University of Applied Sciences)
 Thomas Hoeren (Professor of Information, Media and Business Law,
University of Münster)
 Werner Janjic (Research & Teaching Assistant, Software-Engineering
Group, University of Mannheim)
 Christian Joerges (Professor of Law and Society, Hertie School of
Governance; Research Professor, University of Bremen, Centre of
European Law and Politics)
 Hans Joosten (Professor of Peatland Studies and Palaeoecology,
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität Greifswald)
 Jochen Kerdels (Researcher, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer
Science, University of Hagen)
 Guenter Koehnken (Professor of Psychology, University of Kiel)
 Katrin Kämpf (Research Assistant, Media Studies, University of
Paderborn)
 Johannes Kaspar (Professor of Criminal Law, University of Augsburg)
 Wolfgang Kilian (Professor Emeritus for Legal Informatics, Legal
Theory and Civil Law, Leibniz-University Hanover)
 Christian Klinke (Heisenberg scholar, University of Hamburg)
 Jan Krämer (Associate Professor; Head of Research Group
Telecommunications Markets, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology)
 Peter Lampe (Professor of Theology, University of Heidelberg)
 Thomas Lemke (Professor of Sociology, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt)
 Kai von Lewinski (Associate Professor (Privatdozent), Humboldt-
Universität zu Berlin)
 Daniel Loick (Philosopher, Goethe University Frankfurt)
 Alexander May (Professor of Cryptology, Ruhr University Bochum)
 Franz Mayer (Professor, Chair of Public Law, European Law,
Comparative Law, Law and Politics, University of Bielefeld)
 Axel Metzger (Professor of Civil Law, Intellectual Property,
Information Technology Law and Private International Law, University of
Hanover)
 Thomas Mittmann (Professor, Institute for Physiology,
Johannes-Gutenberg University Mainz)
 Rosamunde van Brakel (PhD researcher Surveillance Studies and
Criminology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Eva Brems (Professor Human Rights Centre, Ghent University)
 Wolfgang Mueller (Professor, Department of Media Education and
Visualization, University of Education Weingarten)
 Christof Paar (Professor, Chair for Embedded Security, Ruhr
University Bochum)
 Günther Pernul (Professor for Information Systems, Universität
Regensburg)
 Benjamin Rampp (Research Associate, Interdepartmental Centre for
Ethics in the Sciences and Humanities, University of Tübingen)
 Kai Rannenberg (Professor Mobile Business & Multilateral Security,
Goethe University Frankfurt)
 Aljoscha Rheinwalt (Ph.D Researcher, Potsdam Institute for Climate
Impact Research)
 Theo Röhle (Research Associate, Braunschweig University of Art)
 Alexander Rossnagel (Professor of Public Law, University of Kassel)
 Jens Schade (Researcher, Dresden University of Technology)
 Heidi Schäfer (Fellow at the International Centre of Ethics in The
Sciences and Humanities, University of Tübingen)
 Sebastian Schelter (Ph.D Researcher, Database Systems and Information
Management Group, Technische Universität Berlin)
 Karin Schermelleh-Engel (Professor of Psychology, Goethe University)
 Britta Schinzel (Professor of Informatics and Society, University of
Freiburg)
 Henrike Schmidt (Private Lecturer, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Thomas Schmitz (Professor of Philosophy, University of Bonn)
 Heinz Schweppe (Professor em. of Databases and Information Systems,
Freie Universitaet Berlin)
 Matthias Selbach (Professor of Proteomics, Max Delbrueck Center for
Molecular Medicine Berlin)
 Werner Sobek (Professor and Chair for Lightweight Structures,
Stuttgart University, Germany)
 Christoph Sorge (Juniorprofessor at the Computer Science Department,
University of Paderborn)
 Indra Spiecker (Professor of Law, Goethe University Frankfurt)
 Tsjalling Swierstra (Professor of Philosophy, Maastricht University)
 Elly Spijkerman (Researcher, University of Potsdam)
 Rob van Son (University of Amsterdam, Netherlands Cancer
Institute/Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital)
 Piet Hein van Kempen (Professor of Criminal Law and Criminal
Procedure, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Feer Verkade (Emeritus Professor Special aspects of Private Law,
University of Amsterdam)
 Michael Vliek (Lecturer, Department of Psychology, University of
Amsterdam)
 Titus Stahl (Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Goethe University
Frankfurt)
 Fritz Strack (Professor of Psychology, University of Würzburg)
 Thorsten Strufe (Professor for Peer-to-Peer Networks, TU Darmstadt)
 Gerd Stumme (Professor of Computer Science, Universität Kassel)
 Niels Taubert (Researcher, Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Science and
Humanities)
 Gunther Teubner (Professor of Law and Legal Sociology, Goethe
Universität Frankfurt)
 Michael Waidner (Professor for Security in Information Technology,
Technische Universität Darmstadt; Director, Fraunhofer Institute for
Secure Information Technology)
 Jutta Weber (Professor for Media Studies, University of Paderborn)
 Kai Wulff (Assistant Professor, Institute for Automation and Systems
Engineering, Technische Universität Ilmenau)
 Heinrich Amadeus Wolff (Professor of Public Law, Europa-Universität
Viadrina Frankfurt Oder)
 Nils Zurawski (Professor of Criminology, Universität Hamburg)
 Gregor Wurst (Professor of Church History, with special regards to
the Ancient Church and Patristics, University of Augsburg)
 Jan Wehrheim (Institut für Soziale Arbeit und Sozialpolitik,
Universität Duisburg-Essen
 Maria Bottis (Assistant Professor, Ionian University)
 George Katrougalos (Professor of Public Law, Demokritos University)
 Minas Samatas (Professor of Political Sociology, University of Crete)
 Marcelo Thompson (Assistant Professor of Law, Hong Kong University)
 Majtényi László (Professor for Information and Media Law, University
of Miskolc)
 Katalin Parti (Senior Researcher, National Institute of Criminology,
Budapest)
 Ivan Szekely (Research Professor, Open Society Archives at Central
European University and Budapest University of Technology and
Economics)
 Tom Felle (Lecturer in Journalism, University of Limerick)
 Paddy Hillyard (Professor Emeritus Queen's University, Belfast)
 TJ McIntyre (Lecturer in Law, University College Dublin)
 Michael Birnhack (Professor, Faculty of Law, Tel Aviv University)
 Giusella Finocchiaro (Professor of Internet Law and Private Law,
University of Bologna)
 Chiaria Fonio (Senior Researcher in Sociology, Università Cattolica
del Sacro Cuore Milan)
 Maximilian Mayer (Senior Fellow, Center for Global Studies,
University of Bonn)
 Fabio Massacci (Professor of Computer Security, Universita' di
Trento)
 Andy Moore (Associate Professor, Information School at the University
of Washington)
 Milton Mueller (Professor, Syracuse University School of Information
Studies)
 Steffen Burkhardt (Professor of Media and Cultural Theory, Hamburg
University of Applied Sciences)
 Morton Canty (Research Scientist, Institute for Bio- and Geosciences,
Juelich Research Center)
 Wolfgang Coy (Professor of Informatics, Humboldt-Universität zu
Berlin)
 Michael Ott (Associate Professor of Sociology, Grand Valley State
University)
 Frank Pasquale (Professor of Law, University of Maryland Carey School
of Law)
 Ugo Pagallo (Professor of Jurisprudence, University of Torino)
 Thomas Meier (Professor of Pre- and Protohistory,
Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg)
 Juan Carlos de Martin (Associate Professor; Co-director Nexa Center
for Internet & Society, Polytechnic University of Turin)
 Marco Ricolfi (Professor of Intellectual Property, Turin University)
 Alessandro Spina (Fellow in Economic Law, Faculty of Political
Sciences, University of Milan)
 Mathias Vermeulen (Research Fellow, European University Institute)
 Francesca Vianello (Lecturer in Sociology of deviance, European group
for the study of deviance and social control, University of Padua)
 Andrew Adams (Professor of Information Ethics, Meiji University
Tokyo)
 Itsuko Yamaguchi (Professor of Information Law and Policy, University
of Tokyo)
 Peter Ryan (Professor of Applied Security, University of Luxembourg)
 Christiaan Alberdingk Thijm (Lecturer in Intellectual Property and
Information law, University of Amsterdam)
 Krzysztof Apt (Fellow at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica; Professor of
Computer Science, University of Amsterdam)
 Britta Böhler (Professor of Legal Practice, University of Amsterdam)
 Arie den Boon (University of Amsterdam, Department of Communication
Science)
 Kelly Breemen (Ph.D researcher, Institute for Information Law,
University of Amsterdam)
 Vicky Breemen (Ph.D researcher, University of Amsterdam, Institute
for Information Law)
 Josep Domingo-Ferrer (Professor of Computer Science, UNESCO Chair in
Data Privacy, Universitat Rovira i Virgili)
 Nico van Eijk (Professor of Media and Communications Law, University
of Amsterdam)
 Michael Faure (Professor of Comparative and International
Environmental Law, Maastricht University)
 Matthias Werner (Professor of Computer Science, TU Chemnitz)
 Ferdinand Feldbrugge (Emeritus Professor Eastern European Law, Leiden
University)
 Stan Gielen (Professor of Biophysics; Dean Faculty of Science,
Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Marieke de Goede (Professor of Politics, University of Amsterdam)
 Stef van Gompel (Senior Researcher, Institute of Information Law,
University of Amsterdam)
 Katja Franko Aas (Professor of Criminology, University of Oslo)
 Svein Johan Knapskog (Emeritus Professor, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology)
 Lucie Guibault (Associate Professor, University of Amsterdam)
 Michael Falgoust (Assistant Professor, Department of Philosophy,
University of Twente)
 Elspeth Guild (Jean Monnet Professor ad personam of European
Immigration Law, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Natali Helberger (Professor of Information Law, University of
Amsterdam)
 Mireille Hildebrandt (Professor of Smart Environments, Data
Protection and the Rule of Law, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Wouter Hins (Professor of Media Law, Leiden University; Associate
Professor Constitutional and Administrative Law, University of
Amsterdam)
 Jaap-Henk Hoepman (Associate Professor in Computer Security, Privacy
and Identity Management, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Thomas Hoogeboom (Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of
Epidemiology, Maastricht University)
 Bernt Hugenholtz (Professor of Intellectual Property Law, University
of Amsterdam)
 Henrik Jensen (Professor of Mathematical Physics; Leader of the
Complexity & Networks Group, Imperial College London)
 Roman Brinzanik (Researcher, Department of Computational Molecular
Biology Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics)
 Bernhard Schiekel (Retired Researcher in Mathematical Physics,
University of Würzburg and University of Munich)
 Lochlan Morrissey (Ph.D researcher, School of Language and
Linguistics, Griffith University, Australia)
 Markus Arnold (Professor of Philosophy, Institute of Science
Communication & Higher Education Research, Alpen-Adria-University
Klagenfurt, Austria)
 Thomas Egli (Professor Emeritus, ETH Zürich; Eawag, Swiss Federal
Water Research Institute)
 Ruben Flores (Assistant Professor of Sociology, National Research
University - Higher School of Economics, Russian Federation)
 Erik Huizer (Professor of Internet Applications, Utrecht University)
 Jan Kabel (Emeritus Professor Information Law, University of
Amsterdam)
 Gerard Kempen (Emeritus Professor of Cognitive Psychology, Leiden
University)
 Corné van den Kieboom (Ph.D. Researcher in Cellular and Molecular
Biotechnology, Radboud University Medical Centre)
 Merel Koning (Ph.D Researcher, Privacy & Identity Lab, Radboud
University Nijmegen)
 Salomon Kroonenberg (Emeritus Professor of Geology, Delft University
of Technology)
 Richard Lamb (Lecturer, University of Delft; Member of the Advisory
Board, Inter College Business School Amsterdam)
 Ronald Leenes (Professor of Regulation by Technology, Tilburg
University)
 Hans Lindahl (Professor of Legal Philosophy, Tilburg University)
 Arno Lodder (Professor on Law and Internet, Vrije Universiteit
Amsterdam)
 Marco Loos (Professor of Private Law, University of Amsterdam)
 Michael Nagenborg (Assistant Professor for Philosophy of Technology,
University of Twente)
 Ton Nijhuis (Professor of German Studies, University of Amsterdam)
 Andrew Roberts (Senior Lecturer, Melbourne Law School, Melbourne
University)
 Ingo Petzke (Emeritus Professor, University of Applied Sciences,
Wuerzburg; Adjunct Professor, James Cook University Australia)
 Mareike Foecking (Professor of Photography, Fachhochschule Dortmund
University of Applied Sciences and Arts)
 Christoph Gossing (Research Assistant, Universität Trier)
 Samuel Greef (Postdoc Researcher, University of Kassel)
 Axel Groenemeyer (Professor Theorie und Empirie der Sozialpädagogik,
Dortmund University)
 Christian Grothoff (Emmy-Noether Research Group Leader, TU Munich)
 Krista Grothoff (Researcher, Technical University of Munich)
 Guido van 't Noordende (University of Amsterdam, Informatics
Institute)
 Manon Oostveen (Ph.D researcher, Institute for Information Law,
University of Amsterdam)
 Jacco van Ossenbruggen (Researcher Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica,
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Mathieu Paapst (Assistant professor Law and IT, University of
Groningen)
 Ruud Peters (Emeritus Professor Islamic Law, University of Amsterdam)
 Matthijs Pontier (Postdoctoral Researcher, VU University Amsterdam)
 Robin Geiss (Professor, Chair of International Law and Security,
University of Glasgow)
 Adam Fish (Lecturer, Lancaster University)
 Nicola Green (Senior Lecturer in Sociology, University of Surrey)
 David Harper (Reader in Clinical Psychology, University of East
London)
 Johan Pouwelsen (Assistant professor, Delft University of Technology)
 Jason Pridmore (Associate Professor, Department of Media and
Communication, Erasmus University Rotterdam)
 Niels Birbaumer (Professor, Institute of Medical Psychology,
University of Tuebingen)
 Guido Fioretti (Assistant Professor of Organization Science,
University of Bologna)
 Zamira Xhaferri (PhD Researcher, Department of International and
European Law, Maastricht University)
 Michael Hagner(Professor of Science Studies, ETH Zurich)
 Daniel Hebenstreit (Assistant Professor for Molecular Systems
Biology,University of Warwick)
 Kirstin Goth (Ph.D Researcher, Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, University Basel)
 Dino Pedreschi (Professor of Computer Science, University of Pisa,
Italy)
 Corien Prins (Professor Law and Informatisation and Dean Tilburg Law
School, Tilburg University)
 Beate Roessler (Professor of Ethics and its History, University of
Amsterdam)
 Rob van der Sandt (Emeritus professor Philosophy of Language and
Logic, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Bart Schermer (Assistant professor of Law, Leiden University)
 Vittorio Rosato (Head, Computing and Technological Infrastructures
Lab., ENEA Casaccia Research Centre, Italy)
 Fotis Jannidis (Professor, Institut für Deutsche Philologie,
Universität Würzburg)
 Aaron Clauset (Assistant Professor of Computer Science, University of
Colorado Boulder, and External Faculty, Santa Fe Institute)
 Thomas Fuhrmann (Professor for Electrical Engineering and Information
Technology, OTH Regensburg)
 Andrew Clement (Professor, Faculty of Information, University of
Toronto)
 Moritz Wildgruber (Researcher, Department of Diagnostic and
InterventionalÂ Radiology; International Graduate School for Science
and Engineering, Technische Universität München)
 Lisa Austin (Professor of Law, University of Toronto)
 Melanie Ehrlich (Professor, Human Genetics, Tulane University)
 Sebastian Göndör (Computer Scientist and Researcher, TU Berlin)
 Siegfried Loeschke (Assistant Professor, Institute for Regional
Health Research, University of Southern Denmark)
 Jan Smits (Professor of European Private Law, Maastricht University)
 Bald de Vries (Associate Professor, Institute for Jurisprudence,
Constitutional and Administrative Law, Utrecht University)
 Tijmen Wisman (Ph.D Researcher, Transnational Legal Studies, VU
University Amsterdam)
 Sally Wyatt (Professor Digital Cultures in Development, Maastricht
University)
 Marjoleine Zieck (Professor of International Refugee Law, University
of Amsterdam)
 Gerrit-Jan Zwenne (Professor of Law, Leiden University)
 Frederik Zuiderveen Borgesius (Ph.D researcher, Institute for
Information Law, University of Amsterdam)
 Miriam Lips (Professor of e-Government, Victoria University of
Wellington)
 Scott Poynting (Professor in Criminology, University of Auckland)
 Hans-Peter Müller (Professor of Periodontology, Faculty of Health
Sciences, The Arctic University of Norway)
 Ann Rudinow Sætnan (Professor of Sociology, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology)
 Andrzej Adamski (Professor of Criminal Law and Computer Law, Nicolaus
Copernicus University)
 Beer Franken (Chief Information Security and Privacy Protection
Officer, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam)
 Catarina Frois (Professor of Anthropology, Lisbon University)
 Matjaz Jager (Director, Senior Researcher, Institute of Criminology
at the Faculty of Law, University of Ljubljana)
 Katja Šugman Stubbs (Professor of Criminal law and Criminology,
University of Ljubljana)
 Aleš Završnik (Assistant Professor, Institute of Criminology at the
Faculty of Law, University of Ljubljana)
 Miquel Peguera (Associate Professor of Commercial Law and Internet
Law, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya)
 Tarlach McGonagle (Senior Researcher, Institute for Information Law,
University of Amsterdam)
 Johan Messchendorp (Associate Professor Subatomic Physics, University
of Groningen)
 Antoni Roig (Professor Constitutional Law, Universitat Autonoma de
Barcelona)
 Héctor Silveira (Professor in Philosophy of Law, University of
Lleida)
 Sonja Buchegger (Associate Professor Computer Science, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology)
 Ingo Fetzer (Researcher, Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm
University)
 Mathias Klang (Lecturer, Universities of Göteborg & Borås)
 Susanne Wigorts Yngvesson (Associate Professor in Ethics, Stockholm
School of Theology)
 Oliver Bendel (Professor of Information Systems and Ethics,
University of Applied Sciences and Arts Northwestern Switzerland FHNW)
 Herbert Burkert (Professor Emeritus, President, Research Center for
Information Law, University of St.Gallen, Switzerland)
 Bertil Cottier (Professor of Communication Sciences, University of
Lugano)
 Joram Feldon (Emeritus Professor, ETH Zurich)
 Peter Glassen (Lecturer of Media Science, Bern University of the
Arts)
 Francisco Klauser (Assistant Professor, Institut de Géographie,
University Neuchâtel)
 Daniel Kressner (Professor of Mathematics, EPF Lausanne)
 Marc Langheinrich (Associate Professor for Computer Science,
University of Lugano)
 Hüseyin Levent Köker (Professor of Public Law, Atilim University
Ankara)
 Andrew Adam (Senior Tutor, St Stephen's House, University of Oxford)
 Ross Anderson (Professor in Security Engineering, University of
Cambridge)
 Kristie Ball (Reader in Surveillance and Organization, Open
University Business School)
 Paul Bernal (Lecturer, UEA Law School, University of East Anglia)
 David Berry (Reader in School of Media, Film and Music, University of
Sussex)
 Saúl Ares (Systems Biology Programme, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología)
 Alejandro Forero Cuéllar (Researcher, Observatory of the Penal System
and Human Rights, University of Barcelona
 Eerke Boiten (Senior Lecturer and Director of Centre for Cyber
Security Research, University of Kent)
 Christin Bolewski (Senior Lecturer, School of the Arts, English and
Drama, Loughborough University)
 Victoria Canning (Senior Lecturer in Criminology, Liverpool John
Moores University)
 Tom Crick (Senior Lecturer in Computing Science, Cardiff Metropolitan
University)
 Simon Davies (London School of Economics, Information Systems and
Innovation Group)
 Lilian Edwards (Professor of E-Governance, Strathclyde University)
 Karen Evans (Senior Lecturer in Sociology, Social Policy and
Criminology, University of Liverpool)
 Thomas Gross (Director Centre for Cybercrime and Computer Security;
Lecturer Security, Privacy and Trust, Newcastle University)
 Ben Hayes (Fellow, Transnational Institute)
 Jim Hollinshead (Senior Lecturer in Criminology, Liverpool John
Moores University)
 Sylvia Kierkegaard (Professor, Cyber Security Research - EPSRC/GCHQ
and ILaws, University of Southampton)
 Bev Littlewood (Professor of Software Engineering, City University
London)
 Fiona de Londras (Professor of Law, Durham University; Co-Director,
Durham Human Rights Centre)
 Andres Guadamuz (Senior Lecturer in Intellectual Property Law,
University of Sussex)
 Anil Madhavapeddy (Senior Research Fellow, Computer Laboratory,
University of Cambridge)
 Chris Marsden (Professor of Media Law, University of Sussex)
 Karen Mc Cullagh (Lecturer in Law, University of East Anglia)
 Andrew McStay (Lecturer in Media Culture, Bangor University)
 Christopher Millard (Professor of Privacy and Information Law;
Director of the Cloud Legal Project, Queen Mary University of London
 Philip Moriarty (Professor of Physics, University of Nottingham)
 Geraint Bevan (Lecturer in Applied Instrumentation and Control,
Glasgow Caledonian University)
 Axel Arnbak (Ph.D researcher, Institute for Information Law,
University of Amsterdam; Research Fellow, Berkman Center for Internet &
Society)
 Bodó Balázs (University of Amsterdam, Institute for Information Law)
 Suki de Boer (Ph.D. Candidate, Department of Art History, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Luc Boerboom (Assistant Professor Spatial Planning and Decision
Support Systems and Infrastructures, University of Twente)
 Saleem Bhatti (Professor, School of Computer Science, University of
St Andrews)
 Mike Nellis (Emeritus Professor Criminal and Community Justice,
University of Strathclyde)
 Clive Norris (Professor of Sociology, The University of Sheffield)
 Charles Raab (Professor of Government, School of Social and Political
Science, University of Edinburgh)
 Gemma Galdon Clavell (Researcher, Sociology Department, Universitat
de Barcelona)
 Massimo Ragnedda (Lecturer in Mass Communication, Department of Media
and Communication Design, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne)
 Ana Ramalho (Associate Professor, University of South Wales)
 Krzysztof Kulakowski (Professor of Physics, AGH University of Science
and Technology, Cracow)
 Debora Weber-Wulff (Professor for Media and Computing, HTW Berlin)
 Johanna Söderström (Post-doc Researcher, Department of Government,
Uppsala University, Sweden)
 Henderik Proper (Professor, Enterprise Engineering Team, Public
Research Centre - Henri Tudor, Luxembourg)
 Dirk Brockmann (Professor, Institute of Biology, Humboldt-University
Berlin; Robert-Koch-Institute Berlin)
 Judith Rauhofer (Lecturer in IT Law, University of Edinburgh)
 Brian Randell (Emeritus Professor of Computing Science, Newcastle
University)
 Mark Ryan (Professor of Computer Security, University of Birmingham)
 Burkhard Schafer (Professor of Computational Legal Theory and
Director SCRIPT Centre for IT and IP, University of Edinburgh)
 Joe Sim (Professor of Criminology, Liverpool John Moores University)
 Ann Singleton (Senior Research Fellow, University of Bristol)
 Peter Sommer (Visiting Professor, de Montfort University; Visiting
Reader, Open University)
 Michael Taylor (Research Associate, Department of Earth Sciences,
University of Bristol)
 Robin Celikates (Associate Professor on Political and Social
Philosophy, University of Amsterdam)
 Mireille van Eechoud (Professor of Information Law, University of
Amsterdam)
 Waqas Tufail (Lecturer in Criminology, Manchester Metropolitan
University)
 Luca Viganó (Professor of Computer Science, King's College London)
 Ian Walden (Professor of Information and Communications Law, Queen
Mary University of London)
 Lynne Wrennall (Senior Lecturer in Criminology, Liverpool John Moores
University)
 Joss Wright (University of Oxford, Oxford Internet Institute)
 Bendert Zevenbergen (DPhil Researcher, Oxford Internet Institute,
University of Oxford)
 Alessandro Acquisti (Associate Professor of Information Technology
and Public Policy, Carnegie Mellon University; co-director of CMU
Center for Behavioral Decision Research)
 Robert Boltje (Professor of Mathematics, University of California,
Santa Cruz)
 Stephen Checkoway (Assistant Research Professor, Department of
Computer Science, Johns Hopkins University)
 Stuart Chen-Hayes (Associate Professor, Counselor Education/School
Counseling, Lehman College of the City University of New York)
 Samir Chopra (Department of Philosophy, Brooklyn College and Graduate
Center of the City University of New York)
 Seda Gürses (Research Fellow, New York University and KU Leuven)
 Jeff Jarvis (Professor of Journalism, City University of New York,
Graduate School of Journalism)
 Jennifer Lyon (Associate University Librarian, Health Science Center
Libraries, University of Florida)
 Gary Marx (Professor Emeritus of Sociology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology)
 Benno Teschke (Reader, Department of International Relations,
University of Sussex)
 Guido Hülsmann (Professor of Economics, University of Angers)
 Sebastian Brüggemann (Lecturer in IT-Law, University of Tübingen)
 Andrea Tinnes (Professor of Type and Typography and Co-director, Burg
Giebichenstein University of Art and Design Halle)
 Marc Steinbach (Professor, Inst. für Angewandte Mathematik, Leibniz
Universität Hannover)
 Ernst Fehr (Professor, Department of Economics, UBS International
Center of Economics in Society University of Zurich)
 Dirk Fröhling (Vice Dean Mechanical Engineering and Facilities
Management Mathematics and Computer Science, Gelsenkirchen Bocholt
Recklinghausen University of Applied Sciences)
 Gunter Schütz (Professor, Institute of Complex Systems II, Juelich
Research Center) Germany
 Peter Grassberger (Researcher, Juelich Research Center)
 Steve Tombs (Professor of Criminology, The Open University)
 Evelien Brouwer (Associate Professor, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Aleecia McDonald (Director of Privacy, Center for Internet & Society,
Stanford University)
 Jasmine McNealy (Assistant professor, School of Library and
Information Science, University of Kentucky)
 Heather Patterson (Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Information Law
Institute, New York University)
 Neil Richards (Professor of Law, Washington University in Saint
Louis)
 James Rule (Distinguished Affiliated Scholar, Center for the Study of
Law and Society, University of California)
 Klaus Usadel (Emeritus Professor of Theoretical Physics, University
Duisburg-Essen)
 Franz Mertens (Emeritus Professor of Theoretical Physics, University
of Bayreuth)
 Bob Hoogenboom (Professor Policing and Security, Nyenrode Business
University; Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Mark Thornton (Senior Fellow, Ludwig von Mises Institute)
 Kristina Musholt (Juniorprofessor, Philosophy Department, University
of Magdeburg)
 Wiebren de Jonge (Associate Professor of Computer Science, VU
University Amsterdam)
 Rohangis Mohseni (Researcher, Center for Information Management and
Virtual Teaching; Psychological Institute, OsnabrÃ¼ck)
 Walter Privitera (Associate Professor of Sociology, University of
Milan-Bicocca)
 Marnix Eysink Smeets (Lector Veiligheidsbeleving, Hogeschool
Inholland Rotterdam)
 Juergen Seefelder (Faculty Speaker Dep. Jazz&Popular Music,
University of Music a. Performing Arts Mannheim)
 Edith Rost-Schaude (Retired, Hochschule Darmstadt, University of
Applied Sciences)
 Gerhard Rogler (Professor of Medicine, University Hospital of Zürich)
 Klaus Schäfer (Professor of urban design, Hochschule Bremen)
 Peter Mantello (Professor of Media, Politics and the Cyber Realm,
Ritsumeikan Asia Pacifc University)
 Philipp Klaus (Lecturer Sociology in Architecture, ETH Zurich)
 Martin Saar (Visiting Professor, Goethe University Frankfurt)
 Myriam Dunn Cavelty (Lecturer for Security Policy, ETH Zurich)
 Wojciech Piotrowicz (Research Fellow, University of Oxford)
 Werner Breitung (Professor, Department of Urban Planning & Design,
Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University Suzhou, China)
 Philipp Otto (Research Fellow, Microeconomics Department, European
University Viadrina)
 Francisco Pérez Bes (Professor of Advertising Law, University of
Barcelona)
 Dominic Dyck (Research Associate, Institute for Ergonomics,
Technische Universität Darmstadt)
 Valeska David (PhD Researcher, Human Rights Centre, Ghent University)
 Diederik Wagenaar (Legal Spanish language teacher, University Lille
2)
 Gerhard Kongehl (Professor Emeritus of Privacy Protection and
Information Security, Ulm, University of Applied Sciences)
 Andrea Riemenschnitter (Chair, Modern Chinese Studies, University of
Zurich)
 Veronica Bala (Ph.D Researcher English Literature, University of
Antwerp, Belgium)
 John Domingue (Professor of Computer Science, The Open University)
 Selva Kaynak Koç (Research Assistant, Faculty of Law, Yeni YüzyÄ±l
University, Istanbul)
 Simon Parker (Senior Lecturer in Politics, University of York, UK)
 Willem Kox (Information manager (Faculty of Social and Behavioural
Sciences, University of Amsterdam)
 Yannick Chatelain (Associate Professor, Digital Marketing; Head of
Development, Grenoble école de Management)
 Godelieve van Heteren (Director Rotterdam Global Health Initiative,
Erasmus University)
 Spyros Voulgaris (Assistant Professor in Computer Science, VU
University Amsterdam)
 Stefan Münker (Associate Professor, Humboldt University Berlin)
 John R. Venable (Associate Professor, Curtin University) Austalia
 Dominik Herrmann (Research & Teaching Assistant at Department of
Computer Science, University of Hamburg)
 Muir Houston (Lecturer, University of Glasgow)
 Tobias Vahlpahl (Program Director, Heidelberg University)
 Edouard Kestemont (Emeritus Professor Computer science, Universite
Libre de Bruxelles)
 Julio Hernandez-Castro (Lecturer in Computer Security, School of
Computing, University of Kent)
 Eike Bernhard (PhD Candidate, Queensland University of Technology,
Brisbane, Australia)
 Johannes Müller (Doctoral Student, Central European University,
Budapest, Hungary)
 Elisabeth Heinemann (Professor for Mobile Computing, University of
Applied Sciences Worms, Germany)
 Anastasios Sivridis (Alumnus Researcher, Faculty of Law, University
of Regensburg)
 Martin Stift (Professor, Vienna University)
 Thomas Schwentick (Professor of Computer Science, Technische
Universität Dortmund)
 Norbert Fuchs (Senior Research Fellow, Department of Informatics &
Institute of Computational Linguistics, University of Zurich)
 Diego Latella (Computer Science Senior Researcher, Italian National
Research Council)
 Carsten Vogt (Professor of Informatics, Cologne University of Applied
Sciences, Germany)
 Dirk van der Marel (professor, University of Geneva)
 Nikolaas Oosterhof (Postdoctoral Researcher, Trento University;
Dartmouth College; Harvard University)
 Karl-Dieter Opp (Emeritus Professor of Sociology, University of
Leipzig; Affiliate Professor of Sociology, University of Washington)
 Jürg Diemand (Assistant Professor, Computational Science, University
Zürich, Switzerland)
 Tamás Czárán (Research Professor, Research Group of Theoretical
Biology and Evolutionary Ecology, Hungarian Academy of Science and
Eötvös University, Budapest, Hungary)
 Muhittin Mungan (Professor of Physics, Bogazici University, Istanbul,
Turkey)
 Henri Huijberts (Director of Taught Programmes; Reader in Control and
Dynamics, School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary
University of London)
 David Phillips (Associate Professor, Faculty of Information,
University of Toronto)
 Alexander Borbély (Emeritus Professor of Pharmacology, University of
Zurich)
 Christos Papadimitriou (C Lester Hogan Professor of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley)
 Dieter Armbruster (Professor, Mathematics, Arizona State University)
 Dimple Patel (Assistant Professor, Central University of Himachal
Pradesh, India)
 Dietmar Vogel (Group Manager, Fraunhofer Institute for Electronic
Nano Systems ENAS)
 Uwe Vagelpohl (Senior Research Fellow, Department of Classics &
Ancient History, University of Warwick)
 Louk de la Rive Box (Honorary Professor of International Cooperation,
Maastricht University)
 Pieter Verdegem (Assistant Professor in New Media & ICT, Department
of Communication Sciences, Ghent University)
 Gary Holden (Professor of Social Work, New York University)
 Douglas Maraun (Assistant Professor, GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for
Ocean Research Kiel)
 Carsten Kessler (Assistant Professor for Geographic Information
Science , Hunter College, City University of New York)
 Machteld Vonk (Lecturer/Research Fellow of Law, Leiden University)
 Daniel Howe (Assistant Professor, School of Creative Media, City
University of Hong Kong)
 Khalil El-Khatib (Associate Professor, University of Ontario
Institute of Technology)
 Orla Lynskey (Lecturer in Law, London School of Economics)
 Dunja Seselja (Postdoctoral Researcher, Ghent University)
 Carlos Serrão (Assistant Professor, ISCTE-IUL School of Technology
and Architecture, ISCTE - Lisbon University Institute)
 Carel van Rooyen (Web and Multimedia Computing, Faculty of
Information & Communications Technology, Tshwane University of
Technology, South Africa)
 Bob Askwith (Subject Leader in Cyber Security, Liverpool John Moores
University)
 Shaughan Lavine (Associate Professor, Department of Philosophy,
University of Arizona)
 Walter Selke (Emeritus Professor of Physics, RWTH Aachen)
 Hans-Johann Glock (Professor, Chair for Theoretical Philosophy,
University of Zürich)
 Matthias Berger (Professor of Informatics in Telecommunications, Jade
University of Applied Sciences Wilhelmshaven)
 Hubertus Jahn (Senior Lecturer in Russian History, University of
Cambridge)
 Tristan Henderson (Senior Lecturer in Computer Science, University of
St Andrews)
 Feng Hao (Lecturer in Security, Newcastle University)
 Ville Oksanen (Researcher, Technology Law Group, Aalto University,
Finland)
 George Danezis (Reader in Security and Privacy Engineering,
University College London)
 David Vaile (Co-convenor, Cyberspace Law and Policy Community,
Faculty of Law, University of New South Wales)
 Jonneke Bekkenkamp (Assistant Professor, University of Amsterdam)
 Angela Sasse (Professor of Human-Centred Technology; Head of the
Information Security Group; Director for Industrial Liaison, University
College London)
 Mark Handley (Professor of Networked Systems, University College
London)
 Fritz Schweingruber (Emeritus Professor, Swiss Federal Research
Institute WSL)
 Hamed Haddadi (Lecturer/Assistant Professor in Digital Media, Queen
Mary University of London)
 Masrour Zoghi (Ph.D. Candidate, Informatics Institute, University of
Amsterdam)
 Nils-Hennes Stear (Ph.D Candidate, Department of Philosophy,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor)
 Kavé Salamatian (Professor of Computer Science, Savoy University)
 Neil Mennie (Assistant Professor in Visual Neuroscience, University
of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, Malaysia)
 Marcus Wigan (Emeritus Professor Transport and Information Systems,
Edinburgh Napier University)
 Hans-Paul Schwefel (Professor Emeritus of Computer Science, Technical
University of Dortmund)
 Kira Kosnick (Hannah Arendt Visiting Professor in German and European
Studies, University of Toronto)
 Roman Dilcher (Lecturer in Philosophy, University of Heidelberg)
 Alois Ferscha (Professor of Computer Scinece, Johannes Kepler
University of Linz)
 Beatrice de Graaf (Professor of Conflict and Security History, Centre
for Terrorism and Counterterrorism Leiden University)
 Martijn Warnier (Associate Professor, Delft University of Technology)
 Simon Schlauri (Lecturer (Privatdozent)for Private and Commercial
Law, University of Zurich)
 William Gunn (Head of Academic Outreach, Mendeley)
 Nikolai Mnev (Senior Researcher, Steklov Mathematical Institute at
St. Petersburg)
 Martin Arnold (Research Assistant; Start-up Service, University of
Applied Sciences Erfurt)
 Urs Zimmermann (Ph.D researcher Theoretical Physics,
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf)
 Ulrich Greveler (Professor of Computer Science,Â Rhein-Waal
University of Applied Sciences, Kamp-Lintfort, Germany)
 Berthold Dietz (Professor of Sociology, Protestant University of
Applied Sciences Freiburg)
 Wouter Meuleman (Postdoctoral Associate, Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology)
 Andrew Urbaczewski (Chair, Department of Business Information and
Analytics, Daniels College of Business, University of Denver)
 Jeroen van der Ham (Researcher, Informatics Institute, University of
Amsterdam)
 Oswald Prucker (Senior Scientist, Department of Microsystems
Engineering, University of Freiburg)
 Jens Kehne(Researcher System Architecture Group, Karlsruhe Institute
of Technology)
 Arne Bernin (PhD researcher in Computer Science, Hamburg University
of Applied Sciences)
 Anja Schäfer (Postdoctoral Fellow, Biomedical Engineering, Eindhoven
University of Technology)
 Ricardo Morte Ferrer (Tutor of Law, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya)
 Phillip Rogaway (Professor of Computer Science, University of
California, Davis)
 Frank Römer (Postdoctoral Researcher, Institute of Complex Systems
and Institute for Advanced Simulation, Juelich Research Institute)
 Christian Jessen (Researcher, Leibniz Center for Tropical Marine
Ecology)
 Maria Nikolakaki (Associate Professor, University of Peloponnese)
Greece
 Arie van Deursen (Professor in Software Engineering, Delft University
of Technology)
 Maria Pentaraki (Senior Lecturer of Social Work, Liverpool Hope
University)
 Flora Goudappel (Jean Monnet chair EU Trade Law in the Overseas
Territorries, Erasmus School of Law, Rotterdam)
 Ronald Deibert (Professor of Political Science, and Director of the
Citizen Lab, Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto)
 Jeroen van de Graaf (Researcher in Cryptography, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais) Brazil
 Stephen Sachs (Professor Emeritus of Political Science, Indiana
University - Purdue University Indianapolis)
 Gabriella Coleman (Wolfe Chair in Scientific and Technological
Literacy Department of Art History & Communication Studies, McGill
University)
 Samer Hassan (Assistant Professor in Computer Science, Universidad
Complutense de Madrid)
 Peter Mantel (Professor of Business Administration, Hochschule für
Wirtschaft, Technik und Kultur, Berlin)
 Thomas Meyer (Research Assistant, Idiap Research Institute, Martigny
and EPFL, Lausanne)
 Sky Croeser (Adjunct Research Fellow, Curtin University)
 Mél Hogan (Postdoctoral Fellow in Digital Curation, University of
Colorado)
 James Goetsch (Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Eckerd College St.
Petersburg)
 Robert Volkhausen (Lecturer at the Center for Metropolitan Studies,
Technische Universität Berlin)
 David Johnstone (Senior Lecturer in Information Systems, Victoria
University of Wellington, New Zealand)
 Michael Gurstein (Adjunct Professor, School of Library, Information
and Archival Studies, University of British Columbia)
 Jonathan Askin (Founder/Director,Â Brooklyn Law Incubator & Policy
Clinic, Brooklyn Law School)
 Joel Federman (Director, Transformative Social Change Specialization,
Saybrook University)
 Lene Rimestad (Lecturer and Journalist Teacher, University of
Southern Denmark)
 Todd Davies (Lecturer, Symbolic Systems Program, Stanford University)
 Jeffrey Heinz (Associate Professor, Department of Linguistics and
Cognitive Science, University of Delaware)
 Gordon Fellman (Professor of Sociology and Chair, Peace, Conflict,
and Coexistence Studies, Brandeis University)
 Mary Baine Campbell (Professor of English, Brandeis University)
 Sable Cantus (Part-time Professor, Digital Media, Golden West
College)
 Zihni Özdil (Junior Lecturer & PhD Researcher, School of History,
Culture and Communication, Erasmus University Rotterdam)
 Adekunle Theophilius Tinuoye (Lecturer, Human rights and Labour
Management Relations, Micheal Imoudu National Institute For Labour
Studies, Nigeria)
 Panagiotis Kitsos (IT Law Team, University of Macedonia)
 Mathias Peters (Ph.D Researchar, Database and Information Systems
Group, Humboldt University Berlin)
 Ioannis Iglezakis (Assistant Professor, Faculty of Law, Aristotle
University)
 Erik Boettger (Professor of Medicine and Microbiology; Director and
Chairman, Institute of Medical Microbiology, University of Zurich)
 Lina Dencik (Lecturer, School of Journalism, Media and Cultural
Studies, Cardiff University)
 Philipp Birken (Associate Professor for Numerical Analysis and
Scientific Computing, Lund University)
 Martin Ziegle (Computer Scientist; Professor of Applied Logic, TU
Darmstadt)
 Friedrich Kirschner (Professor for Digital Media, University of
Performing Arts "Ernst Busch" Berlin)
 Fredrik Graver (Head of Studies / Associate Professor, The Norwegian
Film School)
 Denisa Kera (Assistant Professor, National University of Singapore)
 Martin Billeter (Emeritus Professor Molecular Biology, University of
Zurich)
 Jérôme Lang (Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université
Paris-Dauphine)
 Rainer Mausfeld (Professor of Cognitive Science, University of Kiel)
 Gunter Voss (Professor/Director, Sociological Department , Chemnitz
University of Technology)
 Jeroen de Kloet (Professor of Globalisation Studies, University of
Amsterdam)
 Andreas Wagner (Researcher, Academy of Sciences and Literature,
Mainz)
 Patrick De Causmaecker (Professor of Computer Science, KU Leuven)
 Martin Risak (Associate Professor, Department of Labour Law and Law
of Social Security, University of Vienna)
 Daniel Bernoulli (Professor Emeritus of Geology, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology (ETH) Zurich)
 René Hoffmann (Group Manager, Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Solid
State Physics)
 Yolanda Grift (Department of Law, Economics, and Governance, Utrecht
University)
 Thomas Flüeler (Senior Research Associate, ETH Zurich; Institute for
Environmental Decisions, Nuclear Technology Unit Head, Cantonal
Directorate of Public Works)
 Peter Cornelius Claussen(Professor, Kunsthistorisches Institut,
University Zürich)
 Diederik Stoffers (Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Sleep and
Cognition, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience)
 Pavlos Pantazis (Associate Professor in Clinical Social Psychology,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki)
 Christos Frouzakis (Senior Researcher, Department of Mechanical and
Process Engineering, ETH Zurich)
 Michael Lobeck (Researcher, Department of Geography, University of
Bonn)
 Anne Gjelsvik (Professor, Department of Art and Media Studies,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology)
 Robert Vermeiren (Professor child and adolescent psychiatry, Leiden
University Medical Center)
 Peter-Paul Pichler (Postdoctoral Researcher, Potsdam Institute for
Climate Impact Research)
 Yolanda van Tilborgh (Ph.D Researcher Sociology of Culture, Art &
Religion, University of Amsterdam)
 Jennifer Kanary (PhD candidate, Plymouth University)
 Björn Nykvist (Research Fellow, Stockholm Environment Institute)
 Paul Prinsloo (Professor in Open Distance Learning Research,
University of South Africa)
 Andrew Murray (Professor of Law, London School of Economics and
Political Science)
 Uli Fahrenberg (Computer scientist at INRIA, France)
 William J. Drake (International Fellow & Lecturer, University of
Zurich)
 H.P. Luterbacher (Professor Emeritus, Geology Department, University
of Tuebingen)
 Stefano Balietti (Ph.D candidate in Sociology, ETH Zurich)
 Erik Plauschinn (Research Fellow, University of Padova)
 Mutlu Binark (Professor of New Media Studies, Baskent University
Ankara, Turkey)
 Gerard Mom (Institute for Information Law, University of Amsterdam)
 Hannes Thiel (Research Assistant, University of Muenster)
 Nicole Maalsté (Senior Researcher Tilburg School of Politics and
Public Administration, Tilburg Law School, Tilburg University)
 Melih Kirlidog (Associate Professor, Marmara üniversitesi BiliÅŸim
Merkezi, Turkey)
 John Kleinen (Associate Professor, Department of Anthropology and
Sociology, University of Amsterdam)
 Wolf-Christian Dullo (Professor Ocean Circulation and Climate
Dynamic, GEOMAR Helmholtz Centre for Ocean Research)
 Vygintas Gontis (Principal investigator of Vilnius University,
President of the Lithuanian Scientific Society)
 Heinrich Voss (Professor of Mathematics, Hamburg University of
Technology, Hamburg)
 Nicholas John (Assistant Professor, Department of Communication,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem)
 Erik Duval (Professor of Computer Science, KU Leuven)
 Antoinette Weibel (Professor for Management, University of Konstanz)
 William Greene (Instructor in Political Science, South Texas College)
 Brigit van Loggem (PhD researcher, Open Universiteit, the
Netherlands)
 Yvonne Donders (Professor International Human Rights and Cultural
Diversity; Executive Director of the Amsterdam Center for International
Law, University of Amsterdam)
 Robert Koch (Professor of law at the Faculty of Law, University of
Hamburg)
 Christian A. Meyer (Professor, Natural History Museum Basel)
 Holger Braun (Visiting Profesor,Universidad Nacional de La Plata,
Facultad de Ciencias Naturales y Museo, Argentina)
 Markos Papageorgiou (Professor; Director, Dynamic Systems &
Simulation Laboratory, Technical University of Crete)
 Nikolaus Gansterer (Lecturer, University of Applied Arts in Vienna)
 Roland Chrisjohn (Associate Professor, St. Thomas University, Canada)
 Diana Murtaugh Coleman (Doctoral Candidate, School of Historical,
Philosophical, and Religious Studies, Arizona State University)
 Johan Pålsson (Lecturer, Umeå University, Sweden)
 Raul Rojas (Professor, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Angela Mansi (Senior Lecturer Psychology, University of Westminster)
 Dwayne Winseck (Professor, School of Journalism and Communication,
Carleton University, Ottawa)
 Ian Goldberg (Associate Professor and University Research Chair,
Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo)
 Valerio Lucarini (Professor of Theoretical Meteorology, University of
Hamburg)
 Ana Roque (Associate Professor, Lisbon Autónoma University)
 Joshua Cohen (Professor of Political Science, Philosophy, and Law,
Stanford University)
 Stuart White (Fellow in Politics, Jesus College, Oxford University)
 Andrzej Slaczka (Professor Emeritus, Institute of Geological Science,
Jagiellonian University Kraków ) Poland
 Christopher Moylan (Associate Professor of English, New York
Institute of Technology)
 Paul Deurenberg (Professor Emeritus, Nutrition Epidemiology and
Physiology, Wageningen University; National University of Singapore)
 Yngve Sundblad (Professor Emeritus in Human-Computer Interaction, KTH
Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm)
 Ambjörn Naeve (Senior Researcher in Knowledge Management and
Technology Enhanced Learning, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
Stockholm)
 Bryan Ford (Assistant Professor, Yale University)
 Kathleen Barker (Professor, Department of Psychology, The City
University of New York/Medgar Evers College)
 Martin Doehlemann (Professor Emeritus in Sociology, Fachhochschule
Münster/Westfalen)
 Steven Koenig (Researcher, Technical University of Munich)
 Henk Kelderman (Professor of Psychometrics, VU University Amsterdam)
 Michael Myers (Professor of Information Systems; Head of Department
of Information Systems and Operations Management, University of
Auckland Business School)
 Carlos Castillo (Senior Scientist, Qatar Computing Research
Institute)
 Sylvia Stuurman (Assistant Professor Software Engineering, Open
University, the Netherlands)
 André Mulder (Associate Professor Housing Systems, Department Real
Estate & Housing, Technical University Delft)
 Johann Petrak (Research Fellow, The University of Sheffield)
 Denny Vågerö (Professor of Medical Sociology, Centre for Health
Equity Studies, Stockholm University)
 Thorsten Ries (Teaching Assistant, Department of German Literature,
Ghent University)
 Ferdinand von Mengden (Professor of English Historical Linguistics,
Freie Universität Berlin)
 Frederik Franke (Researcher, Fraunhofer Institute for Secure
Information Technology)
 Daniel Lehmann (Researcher, Technische Universität Chemnitz)
 Frank Grossmann (Free Lecturer Pharmaceutical Science, ETH Zurich;
Project leader at Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich)
 Gary Anderson (Senior Lecturer, Drama and Theatre Studies, Liverpool
Hope University)
 Werner Weissenhofer (Associate Professor, Medical University of
Vienna)
 Roman Peperhove (Researcher, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Serkan Uysal (Ph.D Researcher, Department of Architecture, Yildiz
Technical University, Turkey)
 Rania Astrinaki (Lecturer, Department of Social Anthropology,
Panteion University, Athens)
 Roger S. Clark (Board of Governors Professor, Rutgers University
School of Law)
 Matthias Kreck (Professor of Mathematics, Bonn University, Germany)
 Patrick McGovern (Reader, Department of Sociology, London School of
Economics & Political Science)
 Johannes Fuernkranz (Professor of Knowledge Engineering, TU
Darmstadt)
 Gabriel Istrate (Associate Professor, Department of Computer
Science,West University of Timisoara, Romania)
 Benjamin Kelly (Lecturer in Indigenous Studies, UNSW Australia)
 Frans van der Reep (Professor, Inholland University of Applied
Sciences, The Netherlands)
 Gilbert Bernstein (Ph.D. Candidate, Department of Computer Science,
Stanford University)
 Arno Rolf (Professor of Informatics and Society, University of
Hamburg)
 Peter Honeyman (Research Professor of Computer Science and
Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor)
 Dieter Flesch-Janys (Professor, Department of Cancer
Epidemiology/Clinical Cancer Registry, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf)
 David Lindsay (Associate Professor, Faculty of Law, Monash
University)
 Alana Maurushat (Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Law, The University of
New South Wales)
 Jon Crowcroft (Marconi Professor of Communications Systems,
University of Cambridge)
 Alan Schmitt (Researcher at INRIA, France)
 Anton Eliens (professor creative technology / new media, University
of Twente; VU University Amsterdam)
 Neel Krishnaswami (Birmingham Fellow in Computer Science, University
of Birmingham)
 Bernhard Frevel (Professor of Social Science, University of Applied
Science for Public Administration NRW)
 Ariane Windhorst (Lecturer, University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Hanover, Germany)
 Assia Soltani (Secretary of central gender office,
Humboldt-University Berlin, Germany)
 Benjamin Lebsanft (Ph.D Researcher, Institute for Applied Physics,
University of Hamburg)
 Ayhan Demiriz (Associate Professsor, Department of Industrial
Engineering, Sakarya University, Turkey)
 Benedikt Bauer (Researcher, University of Regensburg)
 Gerard Wiegers (Visiting Research Fellow, Ruhr University
Bochum;Professor of Religious Studies, University of Amsterdam)
 David Chillingworth (Emeritus Research Fellow, University of
Southampton)
 Kristina Lepold (PhD fellow, Institute for Social Research Frankfurt
and Goethe- University Frankfurt)
 Aurélien Tabard (Assistant Professor, Université Claude Bernard Lyon
1, France)
 Ruth Rebecca Tietjen (PhD Researcher, Department of Philosophy,
University of Tuebingen)
 Sands Fish (Data Scientist, MIT)
 Josef Früchtl (Professor of Philosophy, University of Amsterdam)
 Sait Baskaya (Research Assistant, Business Administration, University
of Duisburg-Essen)
 Birgit Schneider (Professor for Paleoclimate Modeling, University of
Kiel, Germany)
 Bob Eager (Senior Lecturer in Computer Science, University of Kent)
 Bodo Hattendorf (Senior Researcher, Analytical Chemistry, ETH Zurich)
 Bronwyn Jones (Lecturer in Journalism, PhD Candidate, Liverpool John
Moores University)
 Canan Atilgan (Professor, Sabanci University, Istanbul)
 Carlos Gershenson (Research Professor, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México)
 Carsten Tradowsky (Scientist, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology)
 Chirag Dhara (PhD researcher, Max-Planck-Institute for
Biogeochemistry, Germany)
 Chris Lubbers (Adjunct Professor of Philosophy, Muskegon Community
College)
 Christian Strasser (Postdoc Researcher, Ghent University)
 Christopher N. Bull (PhD Student, School of Computing and
Communications, Lancaster University)
 Damien McCallig (Ph.D. candidate School of Law, National University
of Ireland, Galway)
 Deborah Bowman (Lecturer in English, Gonville and Caius College,
University of Cambridge)
 Dennis Andriesse (Ph.D. researcher System and Network Security Group,
VU University Amsterdam)
 Dennis Grevenstein (Research Assistant, Ruprecht-Karls-Universität,
Heidelberg, Germany)
 Desiree Verberk (Managing Director Educational Development and
Training, University of Utrecht)
 Bettina Fritzsche (Researcher, German Institute for International
Educational Research)
 Elvezio Morenzoni (Professor Experimental Physics, Paul Scherrer
Institut and Univerisity of Zurich)
 Evert Haasdijk (Assistant Professor, VU University Amsterdam)
 William Outhwaite (Professor of Sociology, Newcastle University)
 Fabrizio Gilardi (Professor of Public Policy (University of Zurich,
Switzerland))
 Frank Huysmans (Professor of Library Science, University of
Amsterdam)
 Frank Liebisch (Research Associate (Institute of Agricultural
Sciences, ETH Zürich)
 Frank van Harmelen (Professor of Knowledge Representation, VU
University Amsterdam)
 Georg Neugebauer (Research Assistant, RWTH Aachen University)
 Gerben Zaagsma (Research Fellow, Lichtenberg-Kolleg,
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen)
 Gerhard Krexner (Associate Professor, Faculty of Physics, University
of Vienna)
 Gerhild Rose (Lecturer for English, Language Centre, Technical
University of Dortmund)
 Gunnar W. Klau (Senior Researcher at Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica
(CWI), Professor for Bioinformatics and Operations Research at VU
University Amsterdam)
 H. Siegfried Stiehl (Professor of Informatics, University of Hamburg)
 Hans Kalliwoda (Ph.D. Candidate, PhD Arts, Universiteit Leiden)
 Harald Burgsteiner (Professor, Graz University of Applied Sciences)
 Harald Klinke (Lecturer, Department of Art History, University of
Göttingen)
 Helena Banning (Research Assistant, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology)
 Henning Rosenau (Vice President, Professor for Criminal Law and
Criminal Procedure, Biolaw and Medical Law, University of Augsburg)
 Herbert Jaumann (Prof. Emeritus of German literature, University of
Greifswald)
 Holger Kantz (Professor for Theoretical Physics, Max Planck Institute
for the Physics of Complex Systems and Technical University Dresden)
 Holger Regenbrecht (Associate Professor Information Science,
University of Otago, New Zealand)
 Ian Towers (Professor, SRH Hochschule Berlin)
 Igor Goychuk (Senior Researcher, University of Potsdam & University
of Augsburg)
 Ipke Wachsmuth (Professor and Chair of Artificial Intelligence,
Bielefeld University)
 Iris van Domselaar (Assistant Professor, University of Amsterdam)
 Ivan Herman (Senior Researcher, Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica (CWI))
 Jakob Grue Simonsen (Associate Professor, Department of Computer
Science, University of Copenhagen)
 Jan Kantelhardt (Researcher, Institute of Physics,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg)
 Jochem Jongma (PhD researcher, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Martin Fresow (Research Associate, Department of Educational
Research, University of Wuerzburg)
 Johann-Christoph Freytag (Professor of Computer Science: Databases
and Information Systems (DBIS), Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin)
 Jose Oramas (PhD Researcher, KU Leuven)
 Wolfgang Schomburg (Professor International Criminal Law, Durham
University)
 Juergen Kramer (Emeritus Professor, Dortmund University)
 Julian Saurin (Visiting Associate Professor of Political Science and
International Relations, Middle East Technical University NCC) Cyprus
 Julio Camara-Cordova (Professor Titular "A" Universidad Juarez
Autonoma de Tabasco; Profesor Invitado, Universidad Intercultural del
Estado de Tabasco)
 Jörg Fuchs (Researcher and Lecturer in European Ethnology, University
of Würzburg)
 Martin Kunz (PhD student (Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry,
Jena))
 Marc Witzel (Research Assistant, TU Dortmund)
 Jørgen KirksÃ¦ther (Adviser, University of Oslo)
 Andreas Busch (Professor of Political Science, University of
Göttingen)
 Andrew Sayer (Professor, Lancaster University, UK)
 Jürgen K. Singer (Professor for Computer Graphics, Animation, and
Virtual Reality, Harz University of Applied Sciences)
 Kari Käsper (Lecturer, Tallinn Law School, Tallinn University of
Technology) Estonia
 Albert Meroño-Peñuela (PhD researcher, Department of Computer
Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Malte Helmert (Assistant Professor, Research Group Artificial
Intelligence, University of Basel)
 Andrea Knaut (Research Associate, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin)
 Jürgen Taeger (Professor of Civil Law Trade and Business Law;
Information Law, University of Oldenburg)
 Anton Feenstra (Assistant Professor, VU University Amsterdam)
 Katja de Vries (Ph.D. researcher, Vrije Universiteit Brussel)
 Kerstin Fischer (Associate Professor, Institute for Design and
Communication, University of Southern Denmark)
 Andreas Ohliger (Research Assistant, Institute of Heat and Mass
Transfer, RWTH Aachen University)
 Andrew Brook (Chancellor's Professor of Philosophy and Cognitive
Science Carleton University, Ottawa)
 Andrew S. Tanenbaum (Professor of Computer Science, Vrije
Universiteit)
 Kirsty Kitto (Research Fellow, Queensland University of Technology)
 Kjetil Kjernsmo (Ph.d. Research Fellow, University of Oslo)
 Klaas Andries de Graaf (PhD Researcher, Department of Computer
Science, VU University Amsterdam)
 Krassie Petrova (Senior Research Lecturer (Information Systems and
Technology), Auckland University of Technology)
 Valerie Frissen (Professor of ICT and Social Change, Erasmus
University Rotterdam)
 Rupert Lanzenberger (Associate Professor, MD, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria)
 Liam Pomfret (PhD Student Online Consumer Privacy, UQ Business
School, University of Queensland)
 Maarten van Steen (Professor of Distributed Computer Systems, VU
University Amsterdam)
 Malcolm MacLean (Reader in the Culture and History of Sport,
University of Gloucestershire, UK)
 Thomas Payer (Lecturer (Faculty of Earth Sciences, Geography and
Astronomy; Department of Geodynamics and Sedimentology, Vienna
University)
 Marcos Bompart (Professor of Elearning, Universidad Simon Rodriguez,
Venezuela)
 Marios Dikaiakos (Professor of Computer Science and Department Chair,
University of Cyprus)
 Martin Scharm (PhD at the Department of Systems Biology and
Bioinformatics, University of Rostock)
 Mary Bunch (Postdoctoral Fellow, University of Toronto)
 Mathieu d'Aquin (Research Fellow, The Open University)
 Thomas Morgenstern (Institut für Informatik, Humboldt-Universität zu
Berlin)
 Timo Féret (Research Assistant in Computer Science, University of
Marburg, Germany)
 Matthias J. Sax (PhD Student, Databases and Information Systems
Group, Humboldt-Universtität zu Berlin)
 Matthias Riebisch (Professor Computer Science, University of Hamburg,
Germany)
 Matthias Wachs (Researcher, Technical University of Munich)
 Michael Edwards (Senior Lecturer, UCL England)
 Sanne van der Ven (Postdoctoral Researcher, University of Amsterdam)
 Sarah Joseph (Professor of Human Rights Law, Monash University)
 Nadia Kutscher (Professor for Social Work and Ethics, University of
Vechta)
 Pascal Beckstein (PhD-Student in Magnetohydrodynamics, Technical
University Dresden, Germany)
 Nanda van der Stap (PhD candidate, Robotics and Mechatronics,
University of Twente)
 Olaf Sosnitza (Professor of IP Law, University of Würzburg, Germany)
 Peter Wagner (Researcher, Institute of Transportation Systems, German
Aerospace Centre)
 Stephan Dillemuth (Professor, Akademie der Bildenden Künste München,
Germany)
 Tomer Broude (Vice-Dean and Sylvan M. Cohen Chair in Law (Faculty of
Law and Department of International Relations, Hebrew University of
Jerusalem)
 Oliver Zöllner (Professor, Institute of Digital Ethics, Stuttgart
Media University, Germany)
 Eduard Heindl (Professor for eBusiness technology, Furtwangen
University, Germany)
 Rico Bergmann (Ph.D. student, Humboldt-Universitaet zu Berlin)
 Oya Cingoz (Postdoctoral Research Scientist, Columbia University)
 Pablo Gervás (Associate Professor, Universidad Complutense de Madrid)
 Paul Graham Raven (Postgraduate Researcher in Infrastructure Futures,
University of Sheffield, UK)
 Rafael Capurro (Emeritus Professor of Information Ethics, Stuttgart
Media University, Germany)
 Raimondo Catalano (Professor of Geology, University of Palermo,
Italy)
 Thomas Ludwig (Professor of Informatics, Universität Hamburg)
 Tobias Columbus (Research Assistant, Karlsruhe Institute of
Technology)
 Ralf Köhl (Professor of Mathematics, JLUGiessen, Germany)
 Michael Tielemann (Professor of Computer Science, Friedrich-Alexander
University of Erlangen- Nürnberg)
 My Sellberg (PhD Student, Stockholm University)
 Sabrina Krakau (Researcher, Institute of Computer Science, Freie
Universität Berlin)
 Rani Lill Anjum (Researcher, Norwegian University of Life Sciences,
Norway)
 Ray Corrigan (Senior Lecturer (Maths Computing & Technology Faculty,
Open University)
 Ricardo Abdoel (Program Manager, Fontys University of Applied
Sciences department Engineering)
 Richard Beyer (PhD researcher, Institute of Physics, Johannes
Gutenberg University Mainz)
 Richard Jones (Professor of Computer Systems, University of Kent)
 Richard Verkijk (Assistant Professor, Open University (Netherlands))
 Roy Smith (Professor of Information Technology and Electrical
Engineering, ETH Zurich)
 Ruud Mattheij (Ph.D researcher, Tilburg University)
 Stephanie Thiel (Research Associate, University of Giessen, Germany)
 Stephen Marsh (Assistant Professor of Information Systems, University
of Ontario Institute of Technology)
 Steve Strauch (Research Associate and Ph.D. Student, Institute of
Architecture of Application Systems, University of Stuttgart)
 Stoney Brooks (Clinical Professor of MIS, Washington State
University)
 Bertram Batlogg (Professor at the Physics Department, ETH Zurich)
 Susanne Siebentritt (Professor, University of Luxembourg)
 Séamas Kelly (Senior Lecturer, UCD School of Business, University
College Dublin)
 Tanja Schilling (Professor for Theoretical Physics, University of
Luxembourg, Luxembourg)
 Thomas Hales (Mellon Professor of Mathematics, University of
Pittsburgh)
 Tobias K. Kohoutek (Postdoctoral Researcher, Centro de Estudios
Cientificos, Valdivia, Chile)
 Torsten Heinrich (Postdoctoral Researcher, Institute for
Institutional and Innovation Economics, University of Bremen, Germany)
 Tobias Kronenberg (Professor of Economics, Bochum University of
Applied Sciences)
 Tom Bäckström (Professor, Friedrich- Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg)
 Sonja Borski (Researcher, University of Bremen)
 Toni Ferro (PhD Researcher, Human Centered Design and Engineering,
The University of Washington)
 Joanna Hosoya (English Language and Culture Lecturer and Instructor,
Seijo University)
 Henk van Elst (Professor für Angewandte Mathematik und
wissenschaftliches Arbeiten, Karlshochschule International University)
 Kristian Fischer (Professor of Informatics, Cologne University of
Applied Sciences)
 Tom Leinster (Reader in Mathematics, University of Edinburgh)
 Tyrone Grandison (Adjunct Professor, School of Computing, University
of Technology, Jamaica)
 Ulrich Kleinwechter (Ph.D. Researcher in Agricultural Economics,
Social and Health Sciences Global Program, International Potato Center,
Lima, Peru)
 Victoria Carrington (Professor, University of East Anglia)
 Bruno Frey (Professor of Economics, Zeppelin University)
 Ayse Erzan (Professor, Istanbul Technical University)
 Rodolfo Coccioni (Professor of Paleontology, University of Urbino)
 Karl Aberer (Vice-president for Information Systems, Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology)
 Dejan Seatovic (Senior Research Associate, Zurich University of
Applied Sciences)
 Vandana Joshi (Visiting Fellow, Humboldt University)
 Samir Okasha (Professor of Philosophy of Science, University of
Bristol)
 Raphael Salkie (Professor, University of Brighton)
 Lee Jones (Senior Lecturer in International Politics, University of
London)
 Ruth Dineen (Honorary Research Fellow, Cardiff University)
 Bob Willis (Professor, Vancouver Island University)
 Nicola Pratt (Reader of International Politics of the Middle East,
University of Warwick)
 Michael Gelinsky (Professor for Translational Bone, Joint and Soft
Tissue Research, Dresden University of Technology)
 Michael Loughlin (Reader in Applied Philosophy, Manchester
Metropolitan University)
 Gerhard Hägele (retired, Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf)
 Nicholas Maxwell (Emeritus Reader, University College London)
 Timo Jütten (Lecturer in Philosophy; Director of Postgraduate Studies
(Taught), University of Essex)
 Nigel Vincent (Professor Emeritus of General & Romance Linguistics,
University of Manchester)
 Jiri Zlatuska (Professor of Informatics, Rector Emeritus; founder of
the Faculty of Informatics, Masaryk University)
 Ana Brian Nougrères (Professor, Institute of Legal Informatics and
Computer Law, University of the Republic, Uruguay)
 Ursula Kummer (Professor Modeling of Biological Processes, Heidelberg
University)
 Guenter Mahler (Professor, University of Stuttgart)
 Sue Lea (Programme Leader, University of St Mark and St John)
 Virginia Brown Keyder (Adjunct, SUNY Binghamton; Professor, Bogazici
University and Sabanci University)
 Winfried Dulz (Senior Reseracher and Lecturer, University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg)
 Norbert Oellers (Professor of Modern German Literature History,
University of Bonn)
 CJ Hinke (Nonviolent Conflict Workshop, Thammasat University)
 Dimitris Tsapogas (PhD Researcher, University of Vienna)
 Gerd Gruenert (PhD Researcher, Friedrich Schiller University Jena)
 Holly Smith (Lecturer in Higher Education, Univeristy of Londen)
 Nicolas Suzor (Senior Lecturer, Queensland University of Technology)
 Christoph Zydorek (Student Counselor Media Economics and Media
Management, Furtwangen University of applied Sciences)
 Tobias Fritz (Postdoctoral researcher, Perimeter Institute for
Theoretical Physics)
 Frances Causer (Faculty of Arts & Literature, Seijo University)
 Christoph Benzmüller (Heisenberg Fellow of the German Research
Foundation, Free Univeristy of Berlin)
 Anna Strhan (Leverhulme Early Career Fellow, University of Kent)
 Niels Brandt (Research Scienctist, Institute of Anatomy and Cell
Biology, Saarland University)
 Nina Schuster (Senior Lecturer (Urban and Regional Sociology, TU
Dortmund))
 Sjoert van Velzen (PhD Researcher, Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Jayne Osgood (Professor, London Metropolitan University)
 Johannes Feest (Professor, University of Bremen)
 Piotr Konieczny (Assistant Professor, Hanyang University)
 Alexandra Schneider (Associate Professor of Media Studies, University
of Amsterdam)
 Jan Lazardzig (Associate Professor Theater Studies, University of
Amsterdam)
 Rainer Dombois (Professor, University of Bremen)
 Andreas Bücker (Professor for Civil Law, Labour Law and European Law,
University of Applied Sciences, Wismar)
 John Regan (Research Fellow, University of Cambridge)
 Bruno Friedmann (Professor, Furtwangen University)
 Wolfgang Pippke (Institute für Administrative Sciences,
Gelsenkirchen)
 Jørgen Johansen (Researcher and lecturer, Hacettepe University)
 John Holmwood (Professor of Sociology, School of Sociology and Social
Policy, University of Nottingham)
 Nils Carqueville (Research Assistant Professor, Stony Brook
University)
 Wiebke Willms (Lecturer, Alice Salomon Hochschule Berlin)
 Francisco de Castro (Senior Researcher, Queen's University Belfast)
 Alexander Sedlmaier (Senior Lecturer in Modern History, Bangor
University)
 Lutz Prechelt (Professor, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Christian Späh (Research & Teaching Assistant, University of Hamburg)
 Rudy Ligtvoet (Assistant Professor, University of Amsterdam)
 Christian Wartena (Professor of Language and Knowledge Processing,
Hochschule Hannover, University of Applied Sciences)
 Manfred Boni (Librarian, Bergische Universität Wuppertal)
 Robert Sinnerbrink (Senior Lecturer in Philosophy, Macquarie
University)
 Anthony Wasserman (Professor of Software Management Practice,
Carnegie Mellon University - Silicon Valley)
 Daniel Fetzner (Professor, Furtwangen University)
 Uwe Friese (Researcher, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf)
 Jörg Volbers (Researcher, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Bert Vercnocke (Marie Curie IEF Fellow, University of Amsterdam)
 Giampaolo D'Alessandro (Reader in Applied Mathematics, University of
Southampton)
 Patricia Stolz (Professor for User Interface Design, HFU Furtwangen)
 Daniel May (Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Division of Social and
Economic Psychology, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Henrich C. Pöhls (Research Assistant at the Institute of IT-Security
and Security Law (ISL), University of Passau)
 Erhard Treutner (Professor of Sociology, retired from University of
Applied Sciences for Public Administration, Cologne, Germany)
 Dorien Baelden (Senior researcher, Department of Communication
Studies, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium)
 Gian Luca Lippi (Professor of Physics, Université de Nice-Sophia
Antipolis, France)
 Sonja Kolanowski (PhD candidate, University of Amsterdam)
 Julie McBrien (Assistant Professor, Department of Sociology and
Anthropology, University of Amsterdam)
 Anna Hollendung (Research Associate, University of Bremen)
 Pablo A. álvarez Morales (Lecturer, Autonomous University of Baja
California, México)
 Andrew W. Appel (Eugene Higgins Professor of Computer Science,
Princeton University, USA)
 Kai Nagel (Professor for Transport Systems Planning and Transport
Telematics, Technische Universität Berlin, Germany)
 Ken W. Smith (Professor of Mathematics, Sam Houston State University)
 David Yaghoubian (Associate Professor of History, CSU San Bernardino)
 Gerald Teschl (Professor of Mathematics, University of Vienna)
 Dietmar Zaefferer (Professor, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich)
 Frances Brazier (Professor of Systems Engineering, Delft University
of Technology)
 Peter Schwabe (Assistant Professor Computer Security, Radboud
University Nijmegen)
 Joos Vandewalle (Emeritus Professor in engineering, KU Leuven)
 Tanja Lange (Professor Cryptology, Technical University Eindhoven)
 Martin Spiess (Professor for Psychological Methods, Hamburg
University)
 Christophe Guéret (Researcher at Data Archiving and Networked
Services, KNAW)
 Carola Schulzke (Professor for Bioinorganic Chemistry,
Ernst-Moritz-Arndt- Universität Greifswald)
 Rainer W. Gerling (Professor for IT-Security, Munich University of
Applied Sciences)
 Hannes Federrath (Professor of Security in Distributed Systems,
University of Hamburg)
 Johannes Bauer (Ph.D Researcher, University of Hamburg)
 Martin Christof Kindsmüller (Acting Professor of Human-Computer
Interaction, Universität Hamburg)
 Marko van Eekelen (Professor, Open University of The Netherlands;
Radboud University Nijmegen)
 Ed Lazowska (Bill & Melinda Gates Chair in Computer Science &
Engineering, University of Washington)
 Emilio De Capitani (Visiting Professor in Political Science,
University L'Orientale Naples - Italy)
 Paul Ralph (Lecturer, Lancaster University)
 Hans Bronkhorst (retired Information Manager, University of
Amsterdam)
 Jan-Felix Schrape (Research Fellow, University of Stuttgart)
 Chris Jones (Professor of Research in Educational Technology,
Liverpool John Moores University)
 Isabel Wagner (Lecturer in Computer Science, University of Hull)
 Carsten Allefeld (Research Associate, Charité - Universitätsmedizin
Berlin)
 Michael T. Hannan (Stratacom Professor of Management; Professor of
Sociology, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University)
 Steffen Reiht (Professor, Theoretical Computer Science, RheinMain
University of Applied Sciences)
 Knut Hegna (Senior academic librarian, University of Oslo, Norway)
 Eke van Batenburg (Retired Associate Professor Bioinformatics, Leiden
University)
 Nicolas Reynaud (PhD researcher, Technical University of Dresden,
Germany)
 Nikolaos Gazeas (Research Associate, University of Cologne, Germany)
 Lorenz Boellinger (Professor Emeritus of Criminal Sciences Faculty of
Law, University of Bremen)
 Christoph Weniger (Senior Research Fellow, Theoretical Physics,
University of Amsterdam)
 Abhishek Saha (Lecturer in Mathematics at the University of Bristol)
 Martin Salaschek (Research Associate in Psychology, University of
MÃ¼nster)
 Claudia Müller-Birn (Assistant Professor, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Aron Fischer (Mathematics PhD student, City University of New York;
Mathematics Graduate Teaching Fellow, City University of New York -
Hunter College)
 Bernd Gärtner (Professor, ETH Zürich )
 Tobias Heindel (Postdoctoral Researcher, University of Edinburgh)
 Pol Van Aubel (Ph.D. Researcher in Digital Security, Radboud
University Nijmegen)
 Marius Oberle (Research Associate, Institute for Ergonomics,
Technische Universität Darmstadt)
 Stephan Meister (Research Assistant, Ruprecht-Karls-University
Heidelberg)
 Burkhard Gniewosz (Professor for Adolescent Research,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich
 Lilit Hakobyan (Researcher, Freie Universität Berlin)
 Yiannis Manetas (Professor of Plant Physiology, University of Patras,
Greece)
 Gerard Prinsen (Lecturer Development Studies, Massey University, New
Zealand)
 Patricia Schor (Affiliate Researcher, Utrecht University)
 Frieder Vogelmann (Researcher in Political Theory, University of
Bremen)
 Krystyna Kolwas (Associate Professor, Institute of Physics, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland)
 Dirk Oegema (Associate Professor, Communication Science, Vrije
Universiteit Amsterdam)
 Thamar Klein (Independent Researcher & Research Partner, Working
Group Medical Diversity, Max Planck Institute for the Study of
Religious and Ethnic Diversity, Goettingen, Germany)
 Andreas Schmeil (Postdoctoral Researcher, Communication Sciences,
University of Lugano)
 Robin van den Akker (Doctoral Researcher, Faculty of Philosophy,
Erasmus University)
 Han van Ruler (Professor of Intellectual History, Erasmus University
Rotterdam)
 Jörg P. Bachmann (PhD Candidate, Databases and Information Systems
Group, Humboldt-Universtität zu Berlin)
 Bruce Bartlett (Lecturer, Stellenbosch University, South Africa)
 Lee Altenberg (Research Scientist, Ronin Institute)
 Nathanael Hübbe (PhD student, University of Hamburg)
 Luis M. Rocha (Professor of Informatics, Cognitive Science, Computer
Science, Indiana University, USA)
 Nikolas Mavrikakis (Researcher, Technical University of Delft,
Materials Science and Engineering)
 Christine Roloff (Retreated Social Science Researcher, TU Dortmund,
Germany)
 Otto Roloff (Professor Emeritus of Economics, University Wuppertal)
 Djordje Krivokapic (Associate Lecturer, Faculty of Organizational
Sciences, University of Belgrade)
 Pete Donnell (Senior Research Associate, University of Portsmouth)
 Vladan Joler (Professor; Head of New Media Department, Academy of
Arts Novi Sad, University of Novi Sad, Serbia)
 Keith Devlin (Executive Director, H-STAR Institute, Stanford
University)
 Francesca Raimondi (Assistant Professor, Departement of Philosophy,
Goethe University Frankfurt)
 José Figueroa-O'Farrill (Professor of Geometric Physics, School of
Mathematics, University of Edinburgh)
 Christiaan Oostdijk (Ph.D Researcher, University of Bristol,
Department of Archaeology and Anthropology)
 ND Jebessa (PhD Candidate, University of Amsterdam)
 Andrew Baker (Reader in Mathematics, University of Glasgow)
 Ulrich Kraehmer (Lecturer, University of Glasgow, School of
Mathematics and Statistics)
 Susan Sierra (Lecturer in Mathematics, University of Edinburgh)
 James Wright (Professor of Mathematics, University of Edinburgh)
 Jean-Michel Beuken (Computer Scientist, Université catholique de
Louvain)
 Peter Bloem (PhD researcher, Informatics Institute, University of
Amsterdam)
 Spiros Koulouzis (PhD Candidate, University of Amsterdam)
 John Allen Paulos (Mathematics Professor, Temple University,
Philadelphia)
 Jean-Pierre Antoine (Professor of Mathematical Physics, Université
catholique de Louvain)
 Andreas Lianos (Ph.D Student, University of Portsmouth)
 Haluk O. Bingol (Professor of Computer Engineering, Bogazici
University)
 Andreas Diekmann (Professor of Sociology, ETH Zurich)


The signatories sign on their own behalf; their views do not
necessarily reflect the views of their affiliated institutions.

Privacy Policy

The Declaration is an initiative of Prof. Nico van Eijk, Prof. Beate
Roessler, Frederik Zuiderveen Borgesius & Manon Oostveen (University of
Amsterdam).


We support, but are not affiliated to, necessaryandproportionate.org
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #154 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 14 08:42

    
We're seeing a critical mass against surveillance similar to the SOPA
opposition, which was arguably successful. Now if we could get them all
to divide their attention and focus on net neutrality at the same
time. You know, a MOVEMENT supporting a free and open Internet with
privacy protections for all. We'd want to define "free and open," and
"privacy." Broad, vague terms, open to interpretation, like
"democracy."

After many years of grumbling that democracy is ill-defined and often
confused with majoritarianism, I've found in Wikipedia a definition of
democracy I can live with: "Democracy is a form of government in which
all eligible citizens participate equally—either directly or through
elected representatives—in the proposal, development, and creation of
laws. It encompasses social, economic and cultural conditions that
enable the free and equal practice of political self-determination."
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Democracy

Probably better to say "CAN participate equally," because we often
don't rise to the occasion. 

The Koch Brothers have demonstrated (as have others over time) that
it's possible to game democracy - in this case, to drown the present
form of government in the bathtub, as Grover Norquist likes to say. You
might think this is a libertarian position - less government, less
government control. However those regulations they so dislike, while
constraining some, can also be seen as protecting the freedom and
well-being of many more. Another issue for them is that government
costs money, and we're always asking the rich to pay a greater
proportion of the bill for things like education, "entitlements,"
safety regulations (or constraints, they might say), etc. Maybe we
should debate that more directly. Should they pay the bill, if we allow
them to use our country and its economy as a platform for their
accumulation of wealth?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #155 of 196: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 17 Jan 14 11:15

    
Jon, many of the people I expected to be outraged about the end of Net
Neutrality seem to be defeatist or disinterested.  I am pinching
myself. Could it be that deep surveillance by governments is scarier
and gives cover to the possible tyrannies of private companies?

I just paged through some of the awesome <inkwell.vue.61.0-> Viridian
manifesto conversation.  It reads a bit like an artifact of the pre
9/11 world, which it is.  My thoughts seem darker now.  I wonder how
deep spooky government entities will use the internet of things,
wearable and implanted. 

But these long old-form petitions provide a bit of hope. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #156 of 196: jelly fish challenged (reet) Fri 17 Jan 14 11:26

    
PLEASE HIDE THAT LIDST
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #157 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Fri 17 Jan 14 11:48

    
indeed, it is the mother of all scrolls.

the woman who was cited for speeding while wearing google glasses beat both
charges yesterday.  No proof the glasses were in use.  No expert testimony
that the cop's radar was properly calibrated.

apparently there's a law against operating monitoring devices from a private
car, not from a cop car, but the cop car's credibility is expensive to
prove.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #158 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 14 12:53

    
http://www.10news.com/news/trial-begins-in-google-glass-ticket-case-011614

An analogy would be getting a ticket for having your cellphone in your
pocket while driving.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #159 of 196: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 17 Jan 14 13:23

    
(I realize I posted the logged-in link for reading the initial Bruce
Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky event above.  From anywhere else, that's 
http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/61/Bruce-Sterling-A-Viridian-Futur
e-page01.html
)
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #160 of 196: Robin Elliott (robinellt) Fri 17 Jan 14 17:07

    <scribbled by robinellt>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #161 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 18 Jan 14 02:04

    
http://blogs.hbr.org/2014/01/how-silicon-valley-became-the-man/

*It's awesome to encounter this kind of historical revisionism.  One
knows it has to happen, but, well, then, there it is.

*Every decade has its own 1960s in the way that every decade has its
own version of Cleopatra.  I bet you could run the Cleopatra Wayback
Machine to like Zero AD, and people who once knew her personally would
be standing around in their togas going, "heck no man, she was nothing
like that."
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #162 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 18 Jan 14 02:24

    
*Yeah, that's a long, annoying scroll, but public petitions are
supposed to be long and annoying by their nature.  Like: "here we are,
in your face, all of us, endless numbers of us, being annoyed and
annoying."

*There's one guy from Belgrade in that list.  There's something
endearing about that, like "Hey man, I'm here to stand up for Belgrade,
home of free and fearless academic inquiry."  Because he does, y'know.
 He didn't have to sign, but he did.

*Some modern Eastern European dissidents have really got it going on
when it comes to annoying.  When FEMEN shows up on the scene, daily
life just grinds to a halt.  The instant and universal response to
their antics is: "oh for heaven's sake can't we please cover them up
and hide them?"

http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/i-dont-want-to-be-liked-inna
-shevchenko-leader-of-womens-rights-group-femen-talks-dictators-documentaries-
and-death-threats-9062734.html
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #163 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 18 Jan 14 03:54

    

"Robin Elliott (robinellt)  Thanks Bruce, for turning to a bit more
positive note. I admit I was beginning to wonder, though I laugh at
your wit, especially the bit about "personal computers". 

"That said, this whole discussion doesn't have a very positive tone,
does it? Much of it's about problems and fears and little is about
positive hopes or things that might paint a brighter picture of the
year to come. Is it naive to say "Who knows! 2014 might be the year we
turn the corner!"?

*Well, Robin, I have seen some bright corners turned myself, so I
don't discount that possibility.  Around the corner, one finds a
surprising new street.  But it's still a street, just with better
lamps.  Once you turn the corner, there's just more boulevard; it's not
like there's some salvational form of good news that makes everything
okay forever.

*I hear about the positive-tone issue on occasion, but almost always
from my fellow Yankees.  In Serbia, where I spend a lot of my time, I
come across as an alarmingly perky, upbeat and can-do kind of guy.
That's because Serbia is a society of relentless Slavic miserabilism
where much of the population self-medicates on alcohol.  However,
that's only an American assessment; if you're Serbian, then Americans
are like grinning, cash-obsessed neat-freaks running around with
duct-tape and oil-cans.  

*Americans will pep-talk themselves into absolutely any foolishness,
by Serbian standards; Americans will cheerily invade Iraq and think
they can get away with that.  Hey, why be a downer about the prospect? 
Mission Accomplished!

*I'm not anywhere near so dark a writer as Franz Kafka, but there are
eye-witness reports of Kafka reading his stuff aloud in some Prague
cafe, and people just falling out of their chairs laughing.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #164 of 196: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Sat 18 Jan 14 08:36

    
Interesting read no doubt, but it reads more like - State of the World
(according to people with facebook accounts).

This post claimed that the world is as peaceful as it gets:
http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/473/Bruce-Sterling-and-Jon-Lebkows
ky-page06.html#post145

"We do have soldiers fighting, limbs blown off by IEDs in the Middle
East, but they're tragic exceptions, at least for now."

They might be tragic exceptions for Americans. But elsewhere such
suffering is a daily occurence. Two groups that I've been following
recently include the Uyghur in East Asia and the Sami of northern
Scandinavia.

Granted, their persecution isn't on a scale such as the "great wars of
the 20th century". But that's just two groups. Everywhere I look there
are communities for whom rape, forced abortion, violence and death are
persistent and frequent facts of life.

With this in mind, I'm surprised that a topic entitled State of the
World has spent so much time discussing the big 5 tech giants, digital
snooping and wearable technology. Just how much of the world is
actually net-connected anyhow? Half?

Do you mean State of the *World* in the same way that the Red Sox are
currently *World Champions*?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #165 of 196: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Sat 18 Jan 14 12:07

    
I’m woefully ignorant about world current affairs, but just sticking
with the UK and a subject I do know something about…

In the UK, every week, 1 or 2 kids die as a result of abuse and
neglect. That’s about 70 a year. 70 kids, not many. Perhaps we could
characterize them as “tragic exceptions” to use Jon’s words.

Except that they aren’t tragic exceptions. That’s the normal
situation. It happens every single week. And has done for the last 30
years at least, since we began accurate records.

And that’s just the ones who died, whose injuries or malnutrition were
so bad that they actually lost their lives. Another 60,000 kids are in
state care, most of them forcibly removed from their families due to
the severity of the harm or risk of harm.

I can tell you from my own experience and work that this is just the
tip of the iceberg. Social Services resources are so stretched that
those 60,000 are just the most severe cases that they can take on
within their budget. I estimate that about 200,000 kids are living in
conditions that any reasonable person would find unacceptable.

And yet, we do find it acceptable. We don’t talk about it. We don’t do
anything about it. It’s been this way for at least 30 years and it
never changes.

Still, that’s only 200,000 kids from a population of about 20 million.
1% if my math is correct. Given that it hardly ever features in the
media I guess we find that level acceptable. I can remember only 3
child deaths making headline news in the last 8 years, compared to
every single death in the armed forces being mentioned.

In world war 2, the total UK death toll was about 500,000. 1% of the
population at the time. Again, that’s just the top tier – those who
actually died. Many more were injured. So it’s certainly accurate to
say that the number of kids currently suffering is very low by
comparison.

So on the face of it, characterizing child suffering in the UK as a
tragic exception is justified.

But, justified enough to warrant ignoring it in favor of a discussion
about 3d printing or Google glasses. Not by my standards. Particularly
in a topic titled “State of the World”.

The scene was set for a discussion about “technology, design,
politics, high and low culture, and fashion.” And it did indeed shoot
off immediately in the direction of technology and politics. But then
in post number 145 Jon raises the subjects of “war, plague or famine”.
And immediately dismisses them as “tragic exceptions” not worthy of
attention. He then goes on to refer to “real problems”:

“In the USA and I suspect in much of the world, we humans are healthy
and resilient, and well-cared-for despite the volume of complaints
about the medical establishment. We do have real problems, e.g. growing
instances of hospital-acquired infections and antibiotic resistance.”

Perhaps we are predisposed to focus on change. The number of child
deaths due to abuse and neglect is an acceptable norm. It doesn’t
change. It just ticks along. It gets ignored. The “real problem” (in
other words, the problem we notice) is the growing instance of this or
that, or the sudden rise in something or other.

Those 200,000 kids in the UK are alone. They are absolutely not
well-cared-for. What’s tragic is that it’s normal to ignore them.

I’m just using child welfare as an example because I happen to know
the figures. I suspect there are other issues such as the welfare of
the elderly or the mentally ill which have similar problems. Between
the ages of 20 and 50, the most common cause of death in the UK is
suicide
(http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob1/mortality-statistics--deaths-registered-in
-england-and-wales--series-dr-/2012/info-causes-of-death.html).
With this in mind I’m not entirely sure that it is appropriate or
useful to highlight things like antibiotic resistance as a worthwhile
barometer of the State of the World. It would be more useful to point
out that suicide remains a much larger problem. I suspect that it’s the
same psychological mechanism at work – the suicide rate remains fairly
constant, it’s not news and we have no idea how to solve the problem,
so we ignore it.

This discussion seems to be more about things that are changing and
therefore grabbing our attention, and things that are a good deal less
upsetting to think about than the real unchanging state of the world.
Some subjects are upsetting not just because they are tragic in
themselves, but because deep down perhaps we know they are problems
which are so much more difficult to solve. But I'd also question
whether there are many people who actually know these base figures to
start with. I was certainly surprised by the suicide figures. I assumed
heart disease or traffic accidents would be the biggest problem.

No-one likes to dwell on the tragic and sad. But when you title a
topic “State of the World”, is that not a declaration of intent to
muster our internal resources, put aside trivial subjects, and direct
our attention for as long as we can stand it, towards learning about
the real "real problems" of the world however heartbreaking they might
be.

Incidentally (or maybe on a related note) I did a search for “how has
google changed the world” and the first dozen links without exception
just gave me a brief description of what Google’s technology does.
There was no obvious evidence to suggest that the world is changing in
any substantially different way because Google exists (although Bruce's
suggestion that these days MLK's stage presence would be diminished
gave me something to think about). I am not convinced that the most
vulnerable people in the world, of which there must be billions, will
be helped or hindered by 3d printers, wearable technology, or the
political shenanigans of the big 5 tech companies. I’d like to think
I’m wrong. But I fear that the future state of the world, and the
actual experience of most of it's occupants during 2014, will depend so
much more upon human nature than any of this technological
window-dressing.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #166 of 196: Ed Ward (captward) Sat 18 Jan 14 13:09

    
Just out of curiosity, <rw>, have you ever read and/or participated in
one of the past "State of the World" conversations here?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #167 of 196: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Sat 18 Jan 14 13:21

    
No I haven't. Have I made a netiquette faux pas?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #168 of 196: Ed Ward (captward) Sat 18 Jan 14 13:43

    
No, but maybe just a bit of a misapprehension of what's usually
discussed. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #169 of 196: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Sat 18 Jan 14 14:23

    
ok, well, I would hate to waste people's time so I apologise if my
rambling post was off-usual-topic. Thanks for the heads-up. However, I
did genuinely believe I was contributing to subjects already introduced
into the discussion by others, with the exception of one theme which I
thought was vitally relevant, namely how much influence NSA snooping
or the big 5 tech companies can possibly have in the world given that
significant numbers of people aren't dependent on internet
connectivity. If I got that wrong, then yes, I sure as hell misjudged
what this discussion was all about.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #170 of 196: Ed Ward (captward) Sat 18 Jan 14 14:45

    
It's hardly my place to shape this conversation, I'd like to
emphasize, and I'll just disappear until the two main figures return
and deal with this or not, as they see fit. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #171 of 196: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 18 Jan 14 20:28

    

<rw>, nothing wrong with what you posted (again, not my discussion here).
for myself, when jon talked about how healthy everyone is, i thought "hmm,
pandemic of frail elderly/persistent serious mentally ill on the streets
everywhere/autism on the rise/how many people live on statins and
painkillers? checked out a skilled nursing facility/dementia unit recently?'

however, these state-of-the-world discussions do tend to be about certain
topics and not others.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #172 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 14 04:40

    

*Well, the state of the world in California is that the Golden State
is browner that it's ever been.

*There's probably some perky, upbeat way to frame this.  Was it
Trotsky who used to say, the worse, the better for us?


http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5gSVY5Mw0Ab9EKooC4bpWVzDaUfX
Q

Los Angeles — California Governor Jerry Brown declared a state of
emergency Friday due to what could be the western US state's worst
drought in a century, which has sparked wildfires and hurt farmers.
The declaration allows authorities to access federal help to battle
the dry spell that has left huge swaths of tinder-dry forest vulnerable
to going up in flames.

On Thursday, a massive blaze raged just outside Los Angeles, damaging
several homes and forcing residents to evacuate the area, where the
fire risk had been elevated for weeks.

Brown urged state residents to reduce their water use by at least 20
percent.

"I've declared this emergency and I'm calling on all Californians to
conserve water in every way possible," he said in a statement.

"We can't make it rain," he added….

*And, no, California can't make it rain, but California is an oil
state, and had much, much more than its share in wrecking our planet's
weather.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #173 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 19 Jan 14 04:43

    
*That's Davos worry #5 that's reducing California to a cinder.

*Maybe we could get the NSA to *spy* on the weather.  We'd probably
find out all kinds of stuff that the US Congress doesn't allow itself
to speak aloud.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #174 of 196: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 19 Jan 14 05:06

    
Yeah, every time a dry spell stretches beyond a couple of years,
certain dour sorts like myself wonder if this is going to be another
century-long drought like the one that caused the Anasazi civilization
to collapse.

Only a matter of time.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #175 of 196: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Sun 19 Jan 14 08:09

    
I lived in the bay area long enough to know that they think the US, if
not the world, rotates around California, but it's more of a national
drought problem:

<http://www.cpc.ncep.noaa.gov/products/expert_assessment/sdo_summary.html>

That big "Likely" problem across the Gulf Coast in Texas and Louisiana
includes Houston, Austin, the JRTC at Fort Polk, and important coastal
towns like Lake Charles and Lafayette.

All of Oregon, most of Washington and Nevada, and a huge chunk of New
Mexico are in the "persists or intensifies" range.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #176 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 14 08:15

    
<rw>, thanks for bringing your valid perspective into the
conversation. I don't agree that it's any way at odds with what we're
discussing here, and look for you or one of the hosts to unhide your
longer post, which I see as a valuable contribution to the
conversation.

I think you somewhat misrepresent my own rambling post, but c'est la
vie. For instance, I didn't say that "war, famine, and death" are
tragic exceptions - I was referring specifically to war casualties.
Death is never an exception, we all get there one way or another. War
is certainly exceptional so far in the 20th century, though the global
peace index shows that the war is 5% less peaceful than in 2008 - but I
was comparing the 21st century to the 20th, in which there were two
very hot world wars and a very tense cold war. The current
deterioration in peace scores owes to the number of homicides,
increased military expenditure, and pervasive political instability.
(Note that the drug war in Mexico over the last year claimed twice as
many lives as the conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan combined. We should
explore how the drug war relates to world peace...)

I didn't say much about famine, but 15% of people in developing
nations are undernourished, according to the best statistics I can
find, but the number undernourished has decreased significantly in some
parts of the world (Asia and the Pacific, Latin America and the
Caribbean.) There's a slight increase in developed nations.

Do we have global famine - i.e. a global scarcity of food? I say we
don't, though I acknowledge a concern that local and possibly broader
food crises could emerge in the future. 

Consensus is that there's enough food in the world to feed the current
population, so why are people hungry? Issues of economic justice and
poverty, ongoing local conflicts, and climate change (e.g. drought) are
primary causes. 

What did I say about health? I'll repeat part of it here: "In the USA
and I suspect in much of the world, we humans are healthy and
resilient, and well-cared-for despite the volume of complaints about
the medical establishment. We do have real problems, e.g. growing
instances of hospital-acquired infections and antibiotic resistance."

An argument that humans are healthy and resilient for the most part,
that healthcare is generally good in most of the world - much better in
some other countries than in the USA - and that there's no global
pandemic is not the same as an argument that no one is ill, that no one
is suffering, that the world is disease-free. And I wasn't sure
whether to laugh or cry at Paulina's reference to "pandemic of frail
elderly/persistent serious mentally ill on the streets." Old age,
mental illness, and homelessness are not infectious diseases. It's
terrible to have anyone, even the young and healthy, living without
shelter, but while this is a compelling social issue, it's not a health
issue. 

It's true that we should include these sorts of issues in our
discussion, but we misstate or overstate the grimness of the world in
so many discussions of this sort; in our annual conversation, we often
try to show that the world is so much bigger than its miseries.

Some <rw> quotes: 

"Everywhere I look there are communities for whom rape, forced
abortion, violence and death are persistent and frequent facts of
life."

Well, yes - all these things occur everywhere in the world with some
persistence, and may seem frequent, especially given media
amplification. It appears you live in the UK, and in Europe, homicide
rates are relatively low and declining.
http://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/statistics/Homicide/Global_st
udy_on_homicide_Key_findings.pdf


That humans can be violent and commit awful acts is inescapably true.
I question whether we should focus on the exceptional worst (yes, rape,
violence and murder are still exceptional globally), or consider, at
least occasionally, what's working and right with the world. 

"Just how much of the world is actually net-connected anyhow? Half?"

The latest figure I saw was 40% and growing. You can see how it breaks
out at this Wikipedia page:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Global_Internet_usage

Hopefully you'll forgive us for focusing so much on networks and
associated technologies, but I think both of us believe that the state
of the world is increasingly shaped by the state of world networks. I'm
sure that's open to debate.

Here's a for-instance about the transformative impact of network
technologies:
http://www.technologyreview.com/view/519041/how-cell-phones-are-transforming-h
ealth-care-in-africa/

"I am not convinced that the most vulnerable people in the world, of
which there must be billions, will be helped or hindered by 3d
printers, wearable technology, or the political shenanigans of the big
5 tech companies. I’d like to think I’m wrong. But I fear that the
future state of the world, and the actual experience of most of it's
occupants during 2014, will depend so much more upon human nature than
any of this technological window-dressing."

Probably both. Technology adoption has spread rapidly for a reason:
access to the world's information, even narrower slices of it, via the
Internet can be transformative and empowering:
http://www.salzburg.umd.edu/unesco/empowerment-through-internet-access

However there's also the potential down side, e.g. as foreseen by
Jerry Mander:
http://www.wholeearth.com/issue/1340/article/54/internet.the.illusions.of.empo
werment

We're hardly technoutopian in this discussion. Check out my initial
post, for example:

"...I think we're still in a transition with attendant confusion.
These stacks and
related businesses are all about media and marketing, and they require
massive cycles of content, not so much as product but as fuel for the
engines of commerce. So the pipes are full of information, but it's
less reliable than ever - we're missing the intermediary vetting within
the cycle, everybody's running just to stay in the race. And where
media is amplified by a proliferation of content - channels and sources
- there's more room for media manipulation, political propaganda and
commercial marketing messages are embedded, often indistinguishably, in
the signal and the noise. "
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #177 of 196: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 19 Jan 14 09:28

    
jon, you know me well enough that i dont think chronic illness (diabetes,
all the ailments of old age, serious mental illness, etc etc) are
-infectious-. but they -=are= health problems that dont have easy cures; are
costly in every sense --- and are growing probs even in developing
countries.
back to discussions of network effects
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #178 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 14 09:32

    
Paulina, I was just questioning your use of the word "pandemic," which
is associated with infectious diseases, and is the word I had used...
i.e. we weren't talking about the same thing.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #179 of 196: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 19 Jan 14 10:17

    
'pandemic' actually is a nod to my pcp, an old-school wise family doc kinda
fellow --- who -years- ago referred to the 'epidemic' of frail elderly.
and i realized he was right: the etiology may not be cooties but the
widespread illness is just that, widespread illness.

so blame him and then blame me for fanciful (but i think evocative) use of
language.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #180 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 19 Jan 14 12:03

    
I certainly have no issue with evocative language, as long as the
apples are sorted from the oranges by context and connotation. Again, I
was emphasizing what I saw as a conceptual gap between my post and
your response.

And while I may seek to clarify any misperception of where I'm coming
from, I'm glad you and <rw> expanded the focus of the discussion. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #181 of 196: Russell Wiltshire (rw) Sun 19 Jan 14 15:40

    
<jonl> thanks for taking the time to respond. You were right to
clarify certain points - my writing is nowhere near as succinct and
pithy and misses the mark fairly often. Having said that I think we'll
have to agree to disagree on some issues too.

I don't want to go back and forth and tie up the flow of conversation
but I would like to respond on one quick point. You mentioned my
characterization of atrocities as "persistent" and suggested that this
view may be colored by mass media exaggeration. I want to point out
that none of my facts or anecdotes were based on mass media reporting.
It was direct experience (Sami, child welfare), articles direct from
reporters in the field (Uyghur) or official statistics untainted by the
mass media filter (causes of death). I would respectfully suggest that
my point stands - certain significant aspects of the state of the
world go unreported by mass media and do not change. Those things which
mass media/politicians/and big business omit will shape our view of
the world just as much as the subjects they choose to exaggerate. It's
easier to figure out what they are exaggerating because they give as a
ready made list of topics to examine and criticize. We have no way of
knowing what they omit until we go looking for it ourselves.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #182 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 20 Jan 14 04:50

    
http://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/20/oxfam-85-richest-people-half-o
f-the-world

*You have to wonder why eighty-five moguls own so much in 2014; why
not just ten, or one?
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #183 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 20 Jan 14 04:54

    
*I think this is our last day, isn't it?  I'm kind of busy in the
Torino  Fab Lab, sawing stuff up now.

I"m pretty awful at fabrication, it's not my metier and doesn't suit
me at all, but while I do it the most extraordinary literary ideas come
to me.  Typing fiction really seems like a fun idea when I'm covered
with hot-glue and sawdust.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #184 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 20 Jan 14 06:51

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 20 Jan 14 06:54>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #185 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 20 Jan 14 06:54

    <scribbled by jonl Mon 20 Jan 14 06:56>
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #186 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 20 Jan 14 06:56

    
Yes, this is formally the last day of the discussion. We're welcome to
post more after today, but I suspect our exhausted readers won't be
checking here, but will be off to Reddit, Boing Boing, Hacker News,
Medium, Re/Code, Huffington Post, Salon, Arts & Letters Daily, etc. No
dearth of daily new content. In a couple of weeks they'll be watching
the Stoner Bowl
(http://www.celebstoner.com/sports/sporting-highs/2014/01/19/its-denver-vs.-sea
ttle-in-the-stoner-bowl/?ref=6&ref_type=tab),
and the world will no doubt have changed state...

According to the Economist, innovative, emerging technologies mean
that the rich will get richer and the poor will be poorer
(http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21594298-effect-todays-technology-tomorr
ows-jobs-will-be-immenseand-no-country-ready?),
support for <rw>'s contention that human nature and the human
condition haven't changed all that much, despite the "digital
revolution" and the spread of information technologies in both
developed and developing nations. 

And we all inevitably die, one way or another, so mortality is a
constant throughout the many states of many worlds past and to come.
There may be some comfort in the realization that we're all in this
together, the 99% and the 1%. Death is 100%.

I personally think what we do between birth and death matters, so I'm
trying to make the best of it.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #187 of 196: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 20 Jan 14 11:11

    
One never knows with readers.  Maybe they'll be energized rather than
exhausted.  Strange people, readers.  I would know, being one myself.

I often feel strangely refreshed when I find myself reading stuff that
I'm absolutely certain I was never meant to read.  Material that
makes, just, no attempt to please you as a reader at all; written
material that doesn't care if you understand it; it would prefer that
you didn't, really.

JG Ballard used to call that "invisible literature."  He said it was a
gold mine.  Ballard was never the founder of a literary school or
anything, but one of the things I learned from Ballard was that useful
willingness to just go ahead and look.  Sure, maybe it's weird garbage,
inexplicable, heartbreaking even; but a lot of the stuff you ALREADY
know is inexplicable heartbreaking weird garbage.  You're just used to
it, that's the only difference.

I appreciate these rituals we have at the WELL every year.  They give
me a heartening sense of continuity.  Hope to be back in 12 months,
with another backpack full of the implausible.  Why not?  We've done it
before.  The track record speaks for itself!

http://brucesterling.tumblr.com
http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #188 of 196: bill braasch (bbraasch) Mon 20 Jan 14 15:03

    
They're raising money to restore Kesey's bus for the 50th anniversary.
<http://www.oregonlive.com/pacific-northwest-
news/index.ssf/2013/03/ken_keseys_family_wants_to_fix.html>

as Kesey said, "You're either on the bus or off the bus."

thanks for this latest trip report.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #189 of 196: Brady Lea (brady) Mon 20 Jan 14 18:32

    

Thanks so much for this conversation, <bruces> & <jonl>.
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #190 of 196: Gail Williams (gail) Mon 20 Jan 14 19:56

    
Thanks, Bruce, Jon, Brady & everybody who posted and mailed, for the
array of new things to think about. 

And Bruce, that's right down to the last post with "invisible
literature."  It somehow turns the idea of lurking inside out.  I have
recently been reading some scientific abstracts outside any field I
ever studied, and have thought of myself as a semi-literate lurker. 
Now it turns out it's optional to feel that way.  Now I am me, being
happily curious, and the sources become invisible literature.  Damned
handy idea. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #191 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 20 Jan 14 20:12

    
I neglected to post my links:

http://weblogsky.com
http://weblogsky.tumblr.com/

Thanks to all! See you next year!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #192 of 196: david gault (dgault) Wed 22 Jan 14 06:20

    

thanks for everything, and especially the list of 
writers who signed the privacy petition.  
More than enough new books for a lifetime...
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #193 of 196: Robin Russell (rrussell8) Wed 22 Jan 14 14:40

    
Stimulating stuff, thanks to all who contributed, thanks to all who
read. 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #194 of 196: John Payne (satyr) Sun 14 Dec 14 20:07

    
Almost time for the 2015 edition.  Should be a humdinger!
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #195 of 196: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Sun 21 Dec 14 14:48

    

yeah! 
  

inkwell.vue.473 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2014
permalink #196 of 196: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 15 06:30

    
We're on it.
  

  