inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #0 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 12 06:18

    
Welcome to our annual State of the World jam on the WELL, or Whole
Earth 'Lectronic Link, which has been hosting high quality "social
media" via sustained conversations since 1985, and has hosted our
annual State of the World conversation for thirteen years, since 2000.
So we've covered the first decade plus of the 21st century, and the
world's been a little crazier and more volatile every year since we
started. The reality we're in today is reflected in responses I got
when I asked my online social network what they thought we would cover.
They suggested a diverse list: climate change, Arab spring and social
media-driven political upheaval, courage, "1984," Fahrenheit 451, the
future of Occupy, global economics, underground economies, cyberwar,
favela chic, dead media, the future of the Internet in light of pending
legislation (SOPA etc.) and emerging alternative networks, space wars,
and private drone fleets (for tactical protest command, celebrity
capture, and industrial intelligence).

Over the last couple of years, I kept hearing this question: "Where
the hell is my flying car?" We should all re-read William Gibson's
short story "The Gernsback Continuum" as preparation for the next two
weeks (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Gernsback_Continuum).

Who we are:

Bruce Sterling is a science fiction author, journalist, design
theorist and critic, public speaker, and world traveler. Currently
based in Italy, Serbia, and Austin, Texas, he spends much of his time
on the road, and has a truly global perspective which you see in his
novels, nonfiction pieces, and his blog, "Beyond the Beyond." In
addition to his novels, Bruce has focused on the cutting edges of
digital/hacker culture, climate change, global politics, and
contemporary design. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_sterling. He
founded the Viridian Design movement, the Dead Media project, and is
currently fired up about augmented reality and design fiction.

Jon Lebkowsky has been an Internet evangelist and expert, web
consultant/developer, social commentator, gonzo futurist, media analyst
and critic, and sometimes activist. He was a cofounder of FringeWare,
Inc., an early digital culture company/community, and has worked with
and written for bOING bOING, Mondo 2000, Whole Earth, Plutopia
Productions, Digital Convergence Initiative, Wireless Future, the
Society for Participatory Medicine, EFF and EFF-Austin, the WELL,
WorldChanging, SXSW, Social Web Strategies, et al.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky

If you're reading this, and you're not a member of the WELL, you can
still ask questions or send comments: just email to inkwell at
well.com.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #1 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 12 06:28

    
Throughout the world, especially in the U.S. (with the GOP political
circus du jour), we see persistent focus on the politics of the various
nation-states, yet those entities are increasingly broke and
powerless, their poetical and economic force is waning. What other
forces are driving the thrust of current events? Corporations? Big
media? The "1%"? David Icke's reptilian humanoids? 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #2 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 12 17:53

    
Hi!  Good to be back!  I brought my straw hat and cane.

That's always an interesting question, about the forces driving
current events and future ones,  "the significant change drivers." 
What differences are making a difference?

I've tended to emphasize climate change, urbanization and
demographics.  Those are big and significant changes in the world,  but
also pretty easy to measure and quantify.   That's like hunting for
futurity under the street-lights where it's nice and bright.

So I often tell people that the mid-century will be about "old people
in big cities who are afraid of the sky."  I think that's a pretty
useful, common-sense, plausible assessment.   You may not hear it said
much, but it's how things are  turning out.

Futurity means metropolitan people with small families in a weather
crisis.  That's because quite a few of us already are those people. 
Future already here, just not much pontificated about.

But that doesn't mean I can make everybody perceive that reality.  For
instance, right-wing American talk radio guys also have a set of
favorite change-drivers.  They're sure the world is changing, and
anxious that everyone should know the hidden truths about why.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #3 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 12 17:55

    

FUTURE CHANGE  AS SEEN BY AMERICAN RIGHT-WING TALK RADIO, 2011/12.

1. Existential threats to the American Constitution.  Mostly from
"Sharia Law," which is sort of like the American Constitution for
Moslem Islamofascists.

2. Imminent collapse of  all fiat currencies, somehow leading to
everyday use of fungible gold bars.

3. Sudden, frightening rise of violent, unemployable, disease-carrying
"Occupy Wall Street" anarchists who are bent on intimidation and
repressing free speech.

4. Hordes of immigrants being illegally encouraged to flood the polls.

5.  Lethal and immoral US government health-care.

6.  Radical Gay Agenda / Litigious Feminazis (tie).

7.  God's Will. Surprisingly low-key, considering what an all-purpose
justification this is.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #4 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 12 17:57

    

FUTURE CHANGE AS SEEN BY THE PEOPLE'S  REPUBLIC OF CHINA

1. Continue trend of seize the planet's physical means of production
by underpricing everyone else, and enduring the pollution and harsh
labor conditions.  To back off now after such grand, demonstrable
success would be stupid.

2.  Engineer new Chinese material infrastructures of all kinds;
highways, power grids, urban real estate, moon shots, supercomputers,
genetics labs, chip fabs, fab labs, you name it.  Offer to build some
for client states, too.

3. Reverse annoying trends in "international law," because that's
actually Western hegemony.

4. Accelerate collapse of "intellectual property" because it's
actually rentier feudalism.

5. Defeat "international finance" because it's crazy, it doesn't work,
and it deprives state regimes of command over their economies.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #5 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 12 18:02

    

FUTURE CHANGE AS SEEN BY CYBERCULTURE

1. Smartphones!  They make the Silicon Valley of the 1980s look like
the railroads of the 1880s!

2. The almighty Moore's Law commands acceleration -- not just in
processors, but also in storage and bandwidth, hurrah!  If anything
alse can possibly be made to act in accordance with Moore's Law, go for
it!  Brains, genes, teledildonics, anthrax, kidporn, we don't care,
double it in 18 months!

3. SOPA / PIPA / War on General Computation!  No compromise with the
enemy even if they're us!

4. Tactical Media / Occupy / Arab Spring /Facebook-Twitter Revolution!
 Any revolution's great as long as our gadgets are construed to cause
it!

 Quietly ditch all former enthusiastic changes once so similar to 1,
2, 3, 4... These former digital megatrends are to be tossed flaming
into the memory hole:  any "personal" computing that isn't "social'; 
anything "Web 2.0;" any low-bandwidth remnants of Web 1.0; information
superhighways, software that came in boxes; Blackberries, Nokias, IE6,
etc etc etc.  

That stuff's all "Obsolete Before Plateau," as the Gartner Hype Cycle
decrees.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #6 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 12 18:06

    

SOME FRINGE BELIEFS ABOUT FUTURE CHANGES

It's surprising how little vitality these have nowadays.  Instead of
fanaticallly dedicating themselves to narrow, all-explanatory cults,
people just sort of eyeblink at 'em and move on to the next similiar
topic.  In a true Network Society, all fringe beliefs about the future
seem to be more or less equivalent, like Visa, American Express and
Mastercard.  "Conservatism" conserves nothing; there is no
"progression" in which to progress.

Peak Oil.  Oil probably "peaked" quite some time ago, but the "peak"
itself doesn't seem to bother markets much. The imaginary Armageddon
got old-fashioned fast. Peak Oil has peaked.

Islamic Caliphate...  With the collapse of so many Arab regimes, these
guys are in the condition of dogs that caught a taxi.  "Sharia Law" is
practically useless for any contemporary purpose, and Arabs never
agree about anything except forcing non-Arabs to believe.  

Chemtrails.  These guys are pitiable loons, but they're interesting
harbingers of a future when even scientific illiterates are deathly
afraid of the sky.  It's interesting that we have cults of people who
walk outside and read the sky like a teacup.   I've got a soft spot for
chemtrail people, they're really just sort of cool, and much more
interesting than UFO cultists, who are all basically Christians.  Jesus
is always the number one Saucer Brother in UFO contactee cults.  It's
incredible how little imagination the saucer people have.

BitCoin.  An ultimate Internet hacker fad.  You'd think they were
encrypting food and shelter, what with the awesome enthusiasm they had
for this abstract scheme.

Space Travel people.  Visible mostly by their absence nowadays.  About
the only ones left are nutcase one-percenters of a certain generation,
with money to burn on their private space yachts.  This was such a
huge narrative of the consensus future, for such a long time, that it's
really interesting to see it die in public.   There's no popular
understanding of why space cities don't work, though if you told them
they'd have to spend the rest of their lives in the fuselage of a 747
at 30,000 feet, they'd be like "Gosh that's terrible."

Transcendant spiritual drug enthusiasts.  People consume unbelievable
amounts of narcotics nowadays, but there used to be gentle, unworldly
characters who genuinely thought this practice was good for you, and
would give you marijuana and psychedelics because they were convinced
they were doing you a big, life-changing favor.   

You go into one of those medical marijuana dispensaries nowadays,
they're like huckster chiropractors, basically.  The whole
ethical-free-spirit surround of the psychedelic dreamtime is gone. 
It's like the tie-dyed guys toking up in the ashram have been replaced
by the carcasses of 12,000 slaughtered Mexicans.

Nuclear Armageddon enthusiasts.  Kind of a flicker-of-interest for
this around Iran right now.  Nothing compared to the colossal cultural
influence that this paradigm once commanded.  The WMD invasion of Iraq,
kind of the last hurrah for this, it's tragedy redone as farce.  

You show somebody a Dr Strangelove mushroom cloud these days, they're
like, "What is that, Fukushima?  I don't get it."

I could go on about other people's futurisms.  Doing Italy and Serbia
is tempting. But despite the variegated change-drivers that these
interest-groups imagine, I remain pretty sure that all these groups are
heading for a future world where they're elderly, urbanized and afraid
of the sky.   

Even if you believe in reptiloids, you're gonna be a
reptiloid-believing guy in a pretty big town with a lot of your
neighbors pushing walkers in a heat wave.  
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #7 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 12 22:09

    
I'm thinking H.G. Wells would never have written the hyperpessimistic
"Mind at the End of Its Tether" if he'd had a televison set, 24-hour
cable, high-speed Internet access and accounts on Facebook and Twitter.
Our heads are buzzing with possibility, spinning ever faster into the
alternate realities that your various futurisms suggest. I say
"realities," but I'm not sure the word "reality" has much weight these
days - more like competing fantasies, in the sense that Kesey et al
talked about "the current fantasy" and others of us talked about
"believing your own bullshit." Conflicting, competing narratives are
the real games we play. Wells thought he was seeing human extinction,
though it might have been his own personal extinction getting under his
skin. We all have an expiration date, and that can be liberating or
maddening, depending how you take it.

The Pentagon is bending light to hide events:
http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/01/time-hole/ "This is the first
time that scientists have succeeded in masking an event, though
research teams have in recent years made remarkable strides in cloaking
objects." They've teleported Obama to Mars:
http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/01/obama-mars/all/. 

One more from Wired... the more we know, the less we understand:
http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/12/ff_causation/all/1 "... a cause
is not a fact, and it never will be; the things we can see will always
be bracketed by what we cannot. And this is why, even when we know
everything about everything, we’ll still be telling stories about why
it happened. It’s mystery all the way down."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #8 of 240: Polishing my titanium walker (tcn) Thu 5 Jan 12 03:08

    
Two more to bat around...the singularity folks would have us believe
everything should be rosy by 2050 (I take it that's a bust in your
view)and Corey Doctorow sees a looming battle for control of
computation in general: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HUEvRyemKSg.

 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #9 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Thu 5 Jan 12 04:39

    
I'd be interested in the Italian and Serbian views as I have friends
from both of those countries. :-)

And in what way is Cory not just echoing rms?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #10 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 05:57

    
Ted, I suppose we need another category of, FUTURE CHANGE AS SEEN BY 
SINGULARITY WRANGLERS:

* Intelligence explodes as humans augment and amplify their
capabilities.

* Some variation of Skynet becomes self-aware and resets all our
clocks.

* Hyperinteliigent cyborganic lifeforms emerge from the stew of smart
genetics and smarter biochips. 

* Intelligent machines recognize that human entities are feral,
carnal, planet-busting organisms, even in their enhanced state. They
plug humans in to pods and produce a consensus hallucination called The
Matrix… 

"The Matrix is a system, Neo. That system is our enemy. But when
you're inside, you look around, what do you see? Businessmen, teachers,
lawyers, carpenters. The very minds of the people we are trying to
save. But until we do, these people are still a part of that system and
that makes them our enemy. You have to understand, most of these
people are not ready to be unplugged. And many of them are so inured,
so hopelessly dependent on the system, that they will fight to protect
it."

Someone like Gurdjieff - someone who has explored in depth the reality
and inherent limitations of the human organism - would chuckle at the
"intelligence" premise behind all this. Entities that are meta-unaware
will more likely replicate their un-awareness, than create machines or
cyborganisms with hyper-awareness or ultra-intelligence.  We should
probably focus less on "singularity" and more on the waning potential
for survival as a species. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #11 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 12 08:11

    
Future Change as Seen by Italy

The "Crisis."  The planet's finance crisis, as seen by Italians, has
been conflated with all other forms of local discontent and is just
"The Crisis."  The Crisis is like the "Years of Lead" of the 1970s, and
is a general social bad mood that explains and excuses pretty much any
misfortune:  train running late, "the Crisis," cat threw up a
hairball, "the Crisis," etc.  Sometimes it gets more acute and
sometimes less, but it's always there and it dominates discourse.

The "Mud Machine."  This is the Berlusconi media empire, which engages
in the unique practice of suppressing dissent by suggesting that
everybody in Italy equally useless and crooked, so why  even bother. 
After all, everybody in Italy would have orgies involving underage
illegal-alien Moslem prostitutes if they had the chance, so why get all
worked up; mind your own business.  The Mud Machine works because
Italians enjoy being cynical about themselves.  Nobody wants to be seen
as the chump, so everybody ends up being victimized.

The Mud Machine is in fine form and works whether Berlusconi is in
power or not; and as long as leggy showgirls can strut their stuff on
TV, it even makes money.

The "Caste."  Since Italy has had a very low birthrate for a very long
time, it's dawning on people that everybody in power is amazingly old
and that young people can't get a job or a house.   Since the guys at
the top of the heap never really leave power or change their policies,
they are increasingly decried as the "Caste."  Unfortunately for the
young, old people vote very regularly and aren't gonna vote against
themselves.  Japan suffers a similar political helplessness; there's
just not enough fresh blood to renew the state.  It's gerontocracy in
action and it's getting worse.  Italy now has a "technocratic"
emergency government, but they're all old guys.

"Europe."  The Italian version of "Europe" is different from other
people's versions of "Europe," mostly because "Europe" is so much
better-governed than Italy.  If Italy hadn't founded the European
Union, Italy wouldn't be allowed into it now, because Italy's too
decadent and ramshackle to live up to the standards.  So, every once in
a while some kind of cold European economic/political breeze will ooze
over the Alps; and Italians rarely complain; on the contrary, they're
grateful for it and hope for better.  Like, maybe "Europe" will somehow
dispell the "Crisis" without Italians having to do much of anything,
and wow, that would be great.

Illegal immigrants.  There are lots in Italy, and they come from
various terrible places where the Italian military used to hang out,
such as Libya and Somalia.  Internal immigrants from southern Italy
seem practically as bad.  Every once in a while waves of immigrants
show up because NATO drones are blowing up some place and the situation
becomes acute.    There's a vague sense that they all ought to be
swept up and cast offshore before something dreadful happens, but
society's too old to wield a broom, as that's a chore mostly reserved
for the "clandestines."  But any glance at a modern Italian
elementary-school class shows that the next generation's multi-racial
and multi-ethnic.  Just a matter of time.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #12 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 12 08:18

    
I'm thinking H.G. Wells would never have written the hyperpessimistic
"Mind at the End of Its Tether" if he'd had a televison set, 24-hour
cable, high-speed Internet access and accounts on Facebook and
Twitter.

*Yeah, he would have written it anyway, because he was dying, and all
the mediation in the world can't help that.  It's an interesting book,
even though he shouldn't have written it.  Wells wasn't himself in
those last pain-wracked days, and his judgment was disturbed, but Wells
had such awesomely disciplined work habits that if he'd perished in a
flaming train wreck he would have scribbled out "mind at the caboose of
a wrecked train."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #13 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 5 Jan 12 08:26

    
>We should probably focus less on "singularity" and more on the waning
potential for survival as a species.<

That really seems to be the theme. What do you both see as potentially
positive responses to that dilemma?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #14 of 240: David Wilson (dlwilson) Thu 5 Jan 12 09:03

    
short of watching that video could you give us the Cliff's Notes
version of "singularity?"
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #15 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 09:20

    
Ted asks, re the potential end-of-species: "What do you both see as
potentially positive responses to that dilemma?"

I'm not feeling especially apocalyptic. In a chemically altered moment
some years ago, I had a minor sense of the infinite: I was riding off
into the sunrise, and realized the credits weren't rolling, the lights
weren't coming up, the screen wasn't blanking. Species extinction might
be less a reality than species morphing. We still have dinosaurs, only
much smaller, and with wings.

Then again, we all die at some point, and species extinction does
happen. It could be that we're on that caboose Bruce just mentioned,
and the force of the train's shattering collapse is incontrovertible.

The best we can do is focus on solutions, and find ways to work
together to sustain, not just the life of our species, but the quality
of that life.

We're having a breakdown right now, and you can see signs of it
everywhere. Our best hope is that it's just a cycle. When you're in a
down cycle, everything seems to be collapsing, but at some point, that
can hopefully reverse.

Our depression du jour is from a loss of confidence. You can see it in
the Tea Party and the Occupy Movement - what they have in common is a
lack of confidence in the status quo of governance. But they haven't
offered solutions, really. A society requires governance, it can't be
every man for himself (the libertarian ideal) or mob rule (a potential
consequence of "pure democracy"). Government should be a mediation of a
society's desires and its necessities through some reasonable,
principled body. The participatory governance we have in the U.S.
generally works pretty well, though we're on a down side because
legislators and judges are especially corrupt and unprincipled at the
moment. We depend on a commitment to justice that we're not seeing at
the moment. But that can change.

I was initially positive about the Occupy movement and the sense that
it's "for the 99%." However it won't work if we say the 99% are the
good guys, and the 1% are evil. We should rethink that point. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #16 of 240: Peter Feltham (oink) Thu 5 Jan 12 10:04

    
I'd have to agree with you on that last point, Jon.

There's a very good TedTalk from a feisty and on-form Paddy Ashdown
just out. As someone who was on the frontlines, both militarily and
geopolitically over the years, he speaks from experience.

See http://www.ted.com/talks/paddy_ashdown_the_global_power_shift.html
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #17 of 240: Hank Roberts (hank) Thu 5 Jan 12 10:07

    
I'm voting for Jeremy Jackson's "Rise of Slime" as the biggest baddest
ongoing news that's already happening but barely noticed.

You know what I'm referring to.
Or if not, you know how to find it.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #18 of 240: Jasmina Tesanovic (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 10:17

    
Email from Jasmina Tesanovic:

We are witnessing in Italy the fall of the Roman Empire once again:
it's kind of normal there, it's happens all the time over the years,
from  2 thousand years ago to the last twenty years of Berlusconi
reign. What's different this time, is the fall of capitalism and the
Roman Empire is widespread, from US to the Balkans: the transition to
nowhere, the road which we historical refugees started treading some
years ago, is widening and eye opening.  Everything is collapsing in
our part of the world:  public institutions and  private enterprises.
In Italy one person per day commits suicide, be it a person who lost
his job or an indebted private who is sacking his workers. In a
Catholic country where suicide is a capital sin, that makes your soul
wander forever because you will not be allowed to get a proper burial!

The wife of a suicide capitalist obtained for her husband, an elderly
honest businessman, a permit to bury her man, because of his high sense
of responsibility. But  what about  the guy who just yesterday
committed suicide on the road because he provoked a car accident in
which nobody was hurt, but who at the mention of the word police, took
out his knife and stabbed himself to death? His relatives said that his
major fear was that he would lose his job and not be able to support
his family. Going to prison would be the same. Last Christmas, a couple
of people were arrested for stealing food and small gifts: middle
class decent catholics who didn't want to disappoint their families for
Christmas. The charges were not dropped even though they were granted
their loot for free. That's the state of the world in Italy. Some new
moral codes in the nowhere land!
In San Salvario Torino instead, the new year's eve was celebrated by a
very successful public theatre show based on the power of the
transformation in a crisis: after the workshops of crisis where experts
from war zones, refugees and illegals helped italian people with their
survival tips.

In Serbia the crisis is permanent and still the democratic forces
opposing the nationalists are fighting to join the EU crisis: to fall
down integrated, not as a wild  tribe singing in cyrillic nationalist
battle songs…I miss a comment of my late father, a world economist and
a communist who died in 2008, only a couple of months before the dollar
collapsed and the Swiss banks started losing their absolute power. He
always counted on capitalism in order to be a communist. What do Robin
Hoods do these days; Occupy? Occupy themselves? Actually an excellent
idea.

In Serbia we lived through the end of Yugoslavia,  the collapse of a
functional state, even of a healthy state: it's like a premature death
caused by an accident. What about this death of old putrid capitalism
that like a drug or cancer spread to anti capitalists too? I am an
optimist really. It's all about people now: how to avoid suicides and
instead produce goods  and talk sense in  local communities. My rich
"kulak" granddad from Serbia went broke dramatically at the beginning
of 20th century. My grandma, a lady but also a mother of six told him:
now don't you dare commit suicide as it is socially expected from you (
a man of honor had to do it!) but consider yourself a lucky man who
had something to lose. And now  that you have spare time, help me out
with kids and in the kitchen!
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #19 of 240: From Art Dangerfield (captward) Thu 5 Jan 12 11:33

    
jonl: "Our depression du jour is from a loss of confidence[....] The
participatory governance we have in the U.S. generally works pretty
well, though we're on a down side because legislators and judges are
especially corrupt and unprincipled at the moment."

I'd agree that it is a loss of confidence that has caused The Crisis,
as the Italians would have it, but not the confidence of "the 99%" as
Jon implies, but instead the confidence of the capitalist class in the
longevity of capitalism itself. Systemic downturn is only possible
when the investment class begins to doubt its own ability control
future production and sees vast, unknowable risk swallow potential
returns.

The Crisis is also not a weather front that arrives and passes with
the cycles of the Earth but the direct result of institutional policy,
and one that can only be recuperated into the illusion of cyclical
economics well after confidence has been restored.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #20 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 5 Jan 12 12:03

    
I think so, too. My impression is that we now have little parasitic
mathematically complex betting practices that suck value out of the
markets, and actually thrive on downturns. 

I think that is a substantive innovation and regulations change on top
of market cycles, overlaid the way that warming the average global
temperatures is a change on top of ongoing climate cycles.

That means that there is more than confidence that must shift to make
things work better, it seems.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #21 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 5 Jan 12 14:16

    
"Significant change drivers" and "futures scenarios" seem to be two of
the big lenses used today.
'Technodeterminism'(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Technological_determinism)
is rapidly gaining purchase as well. 

As for cycles, 'chaotic disruption', paradigm shifts, 3rd Industrial
Revolution, etc. all seem to fill the bill. Historically, this has all
happened before. Anything different about all of this? Is there a new
gorilla in the room? (Aside from an evaporating planet).

I like to think,hope,that the Net,collaborative efforts,open-source,
from the groundup, local solutions all have potential to at least carve
out some kind of livable, even sustainable, solutions to the bleak
short-range future ahead. 

It's almost as if the accepted scenario is something like, "if we can
make it to 2050 we might have a chance as a species."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #22 of 240: Tupac Chopra (mnemonic) Thu 5 Jan 12 14:31

    
Bruce, what do you make of Buzz Aldrin's drum-beating claims that the
USA needs to recommit to space exploration? His latest addition to his
campaign was published today at Huffington Post:

<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/buzz-aldrin/american-space-exploration_b_1184554
.html>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #23 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 12 15:19

    

*Well, since the missus has seen fit to meander by and deliver a
political peroration (see #18), I'll throw in another one.


Future Change as Seen by Serbia

1. Albanian ethnics occupying the ancestral land of Kosovo, an obscure
patch of mountains that nobody else in the world has ever heard of.
However, Kosovo's nevertheless incredibly and totally crucial and
important to the general fate of mankind; like, seven-hundred
tooth-grinding grudge-grumbling years' worth of importance.  Tennis
stars, busty turbofolk singers, everything else pales by comparison.

2. "NATO."  NATO were the guys who blew up Serbia in 1999 and
therefore ended the most recent Balkan wars, and this affront hasn't
been forgotten.  It has to be "NATO" that committed this misdeed, as
Serbia is currently on rather cordial terms with all the countries
actually in NATO.  So tf you're Serbian and you go tell some NATO
member like Denmark, "hey, you blew us up," they're like, "What?"  So
in Serbian parlance, "NATO" is always up to all kinds of elaborate
skullduggery that nobody else understands.  More fools they.

3.  "Turks."  Serbia is, again, on rather good terms with the actual
Turks inside Turkey, who are nearby and energetic and have some capital
and some skilled manpower.  However, the Balkans are infested with all
kinds of non-Serbian former-Ottoman rabble who are framed as "Turks." 
There are ethnic tidal-waves of these "Turk" guys apparently poised to
storm and slay everyone with scimitars, but if you actually talk to
any of these "Turks,"  they usually say something like, "hey, I'm
Herzegovian by way of Chicago."

4.  The "shadow state" "mafia" "secret police" "mogul" nexus.  These
guys are amazingly secret and totally unreformed basement conspirators,
and everybody knows who they are, because Serbia is a small society
and therefore people are related to them.  Foreigners sometimes surmise
that the "shadow state" is the "real" state, while the elected
government of Serbia is an ersatz state, but the truth is the the
Balkans doesn't really breed any successful nation-states.  There's
never been a "real" state in the region.  It's always been about
shadowy gangs of godfather types making executive decisions when
everybody's really drunk.  The fact that some of them are sworn to
secrecy and heavily armed just makes it easier to get really paranoid,
so that heavy drinking is required.

5. Foreign investment / Serbian passport regimes.  It's all about
foreign money coming in, and whether Serbs get to fly out and spend
some of it.  Since they Serbs get tormented a lot with other people's
sanctions and border controls, these issues loom large in the popular
imagination.  Everybody's always handicapping future developments in
the porosity of Europe, the US, Canada, Australia and so forth.  Real
estate prices also hinge on this situation, so it's a locus of constant
futuristic speculation.

6.  "Russia."  Serbia's fantasy version of Russia is like nobody
else's conception of Russia; most everybody else thinks of Russia as
some half-blind, yellow-fanged ursine creature bristling with rusty
nuclear weapons, while for Serbia, Russia is a fluffy angelic-winged
flying bear to be depicted in stained-glass windows in a cloud of
Orthodox incense.  Tremendous emotional energy is invested in imagining
that Russia will somehow show up and set everything to rights someday,
even though Russia has never really done that anywhere for anybody.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #24 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 5 Jan 12 15:20

    
Jon, I have the same reservations you do about OWS. I don't think
scapegoating the 1% serves a useful purpose. If we took all of the 1%'s
money and mailed everyone a check, it wouldn't make a dent in anyone's
pocketbook. Solutions are not going to be about dividing us, but,
rather, what unites us. We're all riding on the same blue marble.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #25 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 18:44

    
I love this comment somebody posted at bOING bOING
(http://boingboing.net/2012/01/05/bruce-sterling-and-jon-lebkows.html)
about this State of the World conversation:

"That was a huge mess. No format, no questions, no conversation, who's
talking, I don't know, what all this about Italy, a list of loony
issues no one talks about any more, and then it ends on page 1. Huh?"

Heh... I agree. *Huh?* 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #26 of 240: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 5 Jan 12 19:07

    
I can't think of anything more important than scapegoating the 1% at
the moment.  They're driving us off a cliff, and having a great time
doing it.  And there's always the forlorn hope that by properly
scapegoating them, we can avoid a much more unpleasant conclusion to
their ride to hell and glory.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #27 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 5 Jan 12 20:42

    
Following on that, and drifting into the format of a Question for
Bruce and Jon:  Besides being writers, you both have taken on notable
roles as change agents, from the Veridian Design Movement to EFF
chapter organizing. Do you have any wishes or predictions in terms of
protestors and other kinds of activists for this year?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #28 of 240: Alex Steffen (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 20:47

    
Via email from Alex Steffen:

My sense is that the crisis in confidence in governing institutions in
the US (and to a more moderate degree elsewhere) is the direct result
of entirely intentional Neo-Conservative efforts ("government's the
problem, not the solution") designed largely to eliminate regulatory,
cultural and political barriers to the ultra-wealthy accumulating more
wealth, but that the process has now galloped away on its own. What's
happening now is in no one's control.

Paradoxically, perhaps, this feels to me like an optimistic
development. Things need to change profoundly, at systemic levels, and
systemic breakdowns are for the first time in decades putting the
design of those systems (from banking to urbanization to energy to
democratic governance) on the table in a very unavoidable way. Not a
guarantee of a positive outcome, by any means, but at least a situation
to which we can imagine a positive outcome of the right scope, scale
and speed.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #29 of 240: Lena M. Diethelm (lendie) Thu 5 Jan 12 20:47

    

wow.  drivebys by <oink> and <hank>.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #30 of 240: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Thu 5 Jan 12 20:48

    
We're undoubtedly further away from the extinction of our species than
we are from a really bad case of global "interesting times"
economically with a huge shakeup in resources, production, and economic
(lack of) regulation. But we're doing all the extinction things at the
same time as we're plunging into the more near-term crises (I like the
"fall of the Roman Empire all over again" image).

but I remember the focus on oil during the Carter Administration. It
was true that we were heading for the peak, but, as Paul Saffo says, we
were confusing "a clear view with a short distance."

What should we be focusing on now?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #31 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 22:01

    
Protesters are often people who feel powerless trying to find a voice,
to be empowered as part of a show of force. If they fail to organize
effectively beyond the demonstrations, they won't be effective. If they
do organize effectively and take power, they've shifted into a
different context - the risk is that they become what they opposed. In
fact I don't see much effective organization. Occupy is an example of a
protest that can't get past a the demonstration phase - in fact they
willfully tried to extend the demonstration, the "occupation," until it
became counterproductive. It's like they didn't know what else to do.
They didn't want to become just another movement, they didn't want to
be co-opted by existing organizations. 

Obviously we have to do something. On one level I was relieved to see
Occupy Wall Street and the other demonstrations that followed - we were
all wondering when the hell somebody was going to speak up, and those
guys had the guts to take the first step, and the persistence to make
it work for a while. But a real transformation at a political level
will be an effect of organization and a product of rethinking. I don't
think they were organized enough, and it's not clear they were thinking
enough. They had a narrow sense of purpose but were trying to go
broad. Ultimately people, even those who were initially supportive,
drifted. I thought it was a mistake to attempt long term occupations,
the grunge factor alone was a bit distressing, and there was a sense
that they were avoiding solutions in favor of rhetoric. Employing the
vocabulary of the old school left didn't feel right, either. 

I think it's good to show numbers in the streets, especially in places
like Egypt and Syria where there's less of a participatory framework -
working the system from within is harder if the system doesn't at
least profess to value participation.

But what we really need is people working on structures for governance
and frameworks for establishing a consensus that isn't directed by a
self-serving elites. I've worked with groups that try to get people
elected at lower levels of governance and move 'em up - that's harder
to do, and not as sexy as a protest march, but it's what we need -
create a base of principled public servants who aren't driven by greed,
ideology, political bias. 

A lot of people share Mark's sentiment about scapegoating the 1%, but
ultimately I think it just creates more contention and polarization.
But I suppose some friction is inevitable.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #32 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 22:16

    
Alex Steffen has a good point - we're really being pushed to a point
where we have to avoid persistent self-delusion, wake up and take
effective action. 

<paulbel> asks what we should be focusing on now. Climate change and
environmental sustainability, building a viable energy future that
doesn't depend on "the burn." Also building and sustaining a just and
practical economic system that won't collapse under its own weight.
Those are obvious starters.

Maybe we should be thinking about leaving the planet - we're overdue
for some real-world star trek mojo.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #33 of 240: Kieran O'Neill (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 12 22:26

    
Email from Kieran O'Neill:

I don't think peak oil has gone away, just the predictions of
armageddon (though some of that persists). It's actually getting
fairly mainstream attention these days. And the fact remains that
production is falling and demand is rising, with no viable alternative
sources of energy in sight. That's likely to at least tend to
rebalance the proportion of the human race with access to fossil-fuel
dependent activities and commodities such as air travel, private motor
vehicles, and food.

Add climate change, gerontocracy, and a bit of backlash from the
younger generations, and you get "old people
in big cities who are afraid of the sky", living with resource
scarcity and relying on young people who despise them for ruining
their world.

Not a pretty picture, but a motivation to at least try to ingratiate
yourself with the newer generations.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #34 of 240: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 12 04:13

    
Re: the 1%, let me be clear.  I think it's important to scapegoat
them, protest their actions, and if possible bring their excesses under
control because the obvious alternatives are much worse.  

Those alternatives include: 

1) Letting them continue to take American society back to the good old
days of the Gilded Age - and we're more than halfway there now (a
major candidate for a major party has actually criticized child labor
laws - something one would have brought up only as a joke a few years
ago).

2) The 1%-manipulated/sponsored Tea Party movement or some future
offshoot brings fascism to America for real (cue Frank Zappa's ghost
for a chorus of "It Can't Happen Here...").

3) A significant number of people decide that since the 1% completely
control the political apparatus, the only viable means of protest are
violent.  Once you un-cork that bottle, the results are quite
unpredictable - but almost always unpleasant at least in the near term.

With those alternatives, I would say that a massive non-violent
movement "scapegoating" (ha ha) the 1% is certainly the most preferable
option.

Or one could always bury one's head in the sand and pretend that push
has not come to shove on the class warfare front.

And right - peak oil has not gone away at all, it's just become less
trendy to chatter about it.  In the curious way of unspeakable ideas,
it has gone from being beyond the pale to being tacitly accepted
without ever having been acknowledged.  Purges of premature peak oil
enthusiasts will no doubt follow.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #35 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Fri 6 Jan 12 04:37

    
If the 1% were united with the rest of society, there wouldn't be a
problem. This isn't about scapegoating but about recognising that there
has been a delamination....
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #36 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Fri 6 Jan 12 04:40

    
Bruce - Yes my friends in Belgrade talk about NATO like that. Whilst
being perfectly happy to talk to someone from Blair's own country...
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #37 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 12 04:42

    
So, in the U.S., we'll have about 20-30 of these metroplexes and the
rest of the country will be pretty much unsustainable (except for
whatever Monsanto and friends can cultivate). Mother Earth is already
responding. Bruce had a great rant at the close of the 2011 Art &
Environment Convention:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rC6yylIwyKg

Would you talk a bit about the Anthropogenic reverting to 'next
nature' in the unsustainable areas; weeds as victory conditions, making
friends with fire ants (my fave)?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #38 of 240: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 12 04:43

    
Right.  Pretending something is not taking place does not make it go
away.  

I agree that it would be great if we could all just get along, as
Rodney King said.  And once upon a time, we did - when the rich folks
lived up on the hill.  But now that they have so many houses they lose
count - even as many of us are losing our homes - it's a different
story.

Slips.

BTW, loved the description above of the Berlusconi "mud machine."  And
no, I am not going to yield to my spell checker and change that to
"Coniferous," though one is tempted.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #39 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 12 05:05

    
Just read David Weinberger's Too Big to Know

http://www.toobigtoknow.com/

Interesting book. His memorable take away is that "the smartest person
in the room is now the room itself". His point is that knowledge is
networked,and that implication changes everything.

Paddy Ashdown also refers to this same point from a different
perspective. The U.S. no longer calls the shots for the rest of the
world. We've moved to a complex global network, forcing new alliances.

If you look at how the 1% is networked, a bow-tie, it's hard to see
how that all doesn't collapse of its own design.
(http://www.newscientist.com/article/mg21228354.500-revealed--the-capitalist-ne
twork-that-runs-the-world.html)

So, on the one hand we have the rise of city-states or metroplexes,
new treaty-based shifting global alliances, and huge unsustainable
areas of 'next nature' ignoring both. (Guess we need three hands for
that). All necessitating new models.

Is that about right?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #40 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 06:17

    
It really is a crazy world, where a science fiction writer who makes
his living as a public speaker and design theorist and a blogger who
makes his living as a web strategist and developer can hold forth about
the state of the world and have any kind of audience. The knowledge
flows are stunningly complex and have, for many of the Internet years,
been democratized and distributed broadly. Knowledge is networked, as
David says, and you might assume we're smarter as a result.

I don't think we're smarter, though. Access to information doesn't
make you more intelligent; if anything, it makes you more distracted. I
would argue that information (or at another level, data) is neither
knowledge nor a sign of intelligence: those are processes that act on
information to make sense of it, to make it useful. We're not learning
to think any better - we're more distracted, overloaded, confused. I
see it every day, the struggle with information overload and the lack
of authoritative sources that you can depend on to make sense of
things. And there's significant noise in the knowledge ecosystem, e.g.
the powerful right wing astroturf machine that feeds millions of
inboxes in a private, somewhat out-of-sight network of propaganda
distribution. (The left tries to do this, too, but its networks seem
less effective at the moment). 

Meanwhile the system of education, where we might teach people to
think from early on, is underfunded, losing more funds, breaking down,
and was never especially great at teaching critical thinking. Those of
us who've been online for many years realize the profound need for
digital litereacy, an understanding how to take and sort the glut of
information that flows through the network, but that's part of the
mandatory education of children and adolescents as it should be. We're
still restating the Snopes monkey trial, with forces arguing whether we
should be teaching science or superstition in schools. The answer to
that question used to be a no-brainer.

And here's another point: I've worked a lot around people who do
advocacy, and most if not all advocacy is built on an assumption that
governments can offer solutions - they're advocating for laws and
regulations, for strong government implementations.  However
governments aren't strong, and it's not just because libertarian
thinkers have seized the political narrative. Corporations have become
more powerful, and government entities less so, and that's not
something new or attributable to the Tea Party or Ron Paul. It was
nudged along in the U.S. by the Bush 43 Administration's success in
bankrupting the government, weakening it by extracting its funds and
disrupting its funding mechanisms, but that was probably just a case of
making already weak government entities even weaker.

So you talk about the rise of geographical or political entities of
some kind, but you have to factor in the power of corporations and
understand how that manifests in the 21st Century. I also think it's
important to stop thinking about conspiracies and start thinking about
historical forces. I don't think people, as individuals or groups, are
the real drivers. I think there are forces that are inherently beyond
our control. A surfer doesn't try to make waves, he rides 'em. That's
what we should be doing. Think how advocacy would change if we thought
less about changing policy and more about working the real forces in
the world, and transforming the way we think rather than controlling
and policing the things we do?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #41 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 12 06:47

    
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/buzz-aldrin/american-space-exploration_b_1184554
.html

I'm glad to see this elderly astronaut with this much mastery of the
tech details, but this article of his is all means and no ends.  There
is no political or economic purpose to creating a manned colony on
Mars.  How would it survive in the long term, how would it pay its way?
 What exactly would it do?

Aldrin also doesn't mention why NASA can't innovate.  It's because
NASA became a pork machine; it methodically spreads out major projects
among so many Congressional districts that they're unkillable, but also
unworkable. Nobody was ever held to account for the failure of the
Shuttle. even though the thing was a chimeric gobboon from the get-go. 
At least Aldrin manfully admits this failure, but he doesn't address
the underlying systemic problem involved in having Congress run a space
technocracy.  The contemporary Congress isn't about Mars, it's all
about culture war over evolution and climate change.  It's a radically
anti-science Congress where denial of facts is a litmus test.  These
guys can't repair bridges, much less build shuttlecraft.

That doesn't mean the US doesn't innovate in aerospace, though.  A
giant, high-tech, robot blimp with a laser communication system and a
starling horde of Predators.  "Blue Devil" is not fast, it doesn't zoom
into outer space, it just sees global guerrillas and it illegally
kills them.    If anything's gonna intimidate and cow the Chinese,
it'll be weird, scary, Gothic High-Tech devices like this, not some
General Motors Martian bailout for NASA.

*The Chinese are building drones as fast as they can weld 'em. 
Everybody likes drones.  Even terrorists like drones.  In 2012, drones
are where it's at, and they don't even have pilots, much less glorious
astronauts.

http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/11/22/blue_devil_big_safari_adaptive_optics_
tech/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #42 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 12 07:57

    
Impressive tech on that blimp, but it doesn't look too difficult to
shoot down. Are they hoping to "cloak" it?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #43 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 12 08:02

    
The blimp's for the canaille.  They don't have any balloon-busters,
they just have IEDs and a narcoterror budget.  The Blue Devil is what
military aeronautics looks like when you've got absolute command of the
sky.

Now,if you could build a really big Blue Devil, like a Fuller-Sphere
geodesic version, and anchor it to the earth with carbon-fiber cables,
and then install facial-recognition on the bottom and ultra-luxury
malls inside?  You'd have the kind of city implied by our financial
situation.  Rich guys in hemi-demi orbit, narco favelas on the ground.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #44 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 12 08:11

    
Speaking of narco favelas, the second largest economy in the world is
now purported to be the black market, being referred to as System D, by
Robert Neuwirth, in his book Stealth of Nations:

http://www.amazon.com/Stealth-Nations-Global-Informal-Economy/dp/037542489X

The next big growth economy. And labor intensive too.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #45 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 08:18

    
Proponents of a Martian expedition, like Elon Musk, say it's important
because it's important... as thought it's species destiny to move into
space: http://spectrum.ieee.org/aerospace/space-flight/risky-business
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #46 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 6 Jan 12 08:25

    
Re the new Knowledge Network, Howard Rheingold has been curating on
Augmented Collective Intelligence via Scoop.it

http://www.scoop.it/t/augmented-collective-intelligence/p/938116370/co-creatio
n-collective-intelligence-why-combining-co-creation-and-collective-intelligenc
e?_tmc=hiJaO5OXZBRwNezNoglPRlHt0HFry3C61nNAYtbNnig

Great collection of links.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #47 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 09:14

    
Howard will publish a significant book on digital literacy and mind
amplification in March, called _NetSmart: How to Thrive Online_.
http://www.amazon.com/Net-Smart-How-Thrive-Online/dp/0262017458/ This
is the sort of textbook that should be distributed widely: a guide to
best use of the Internet, how to use online tools for amplifying
intelligence.

The future of the Internet could be less about cloning media models
and more about creating new ways to make and distribute media, unless
we insiste on making it Television 2.0. It's hopeful to see people
using the 'net for collaboration and coordination of offline meetings
and events, to the extent that's happening in the more wired and
wireless urban environs. But that Internet is somewhat out of control,
which is to say it's not ideal for 20C mass marketing and advertising.

We could all be living in configurable homes (or home-ish modules)
tailored to our specific quirks, sensors feeding us data about our
consumption and production of energy, computing devices in every nook
and cranny, smart houses with attitude.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #48 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 09:15

    
Somewhere along the way we should talk about art, culture, and
intellectual property. Just ran across this:
http://www.cvent.com/events/the-future-of-art-commerce-what-creators-and-users
-of-visual-content-need-to-know-in-these-rapidly-c/custom-17-c6e750d2365d4914b
b97290e9e24ee72.aspx
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #49 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Fri 6 Jan 12 10:49

    
The Richard Prince lawsuit appeal is being heard at the moment, on the
art & IP front.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #50 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 10:58

    
Here's a good piece about that lawsuit:
http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2011-12-30/news/30572842_1_richar
d-prince-copyright-cases-art-market

"...if the case has had any effect so far, it has been to drag into
the public arena, a fundamental truth hovering somewhere just outside
the legal debate: that today's flow of creative expression, riding a
tide of billions of instantly accessible digital images and clips, is
rapidly becoming so free and recycling so reflexive, that it is hard to
imagine it being slowed, much less stanched, whatever happens in
court."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #51 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 11:01

    
We could also discuss Vint Cerf's contention that "technology is an
enabler of rights, not a right itself." 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #52 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 11:17

    
Sorry, there's a link for that:
https://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/05/opinion/internet-access-is-not-a-human-righ
t.html?_r=1&hpw
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #53 of 240: la brujaja (zorca) Fri 6 Jan 12 12:08

    
thanks jon and bruce. these discussions are always a welcome and thought-
provoking way to start the year.

on my front, this year's boggle is the same as last year's - the explosive
growth of social media. we're told that every minute, there are 700k google
search queries, 100k tweets, 80k facebook wall posts, 13k iphone apps
downloaded, 2m viewers of online porn. clearly, these new forms of
engagement tap innate human urges, but i wonder, as our frog in hot water
madly types away, what soup do you anticipate as the frenzied online
activity continues to heat the pot?

in our current political climate here in the US, we watch incredulously as
the 'liberal' party blithely gives away human rights won by previous
generations and the 'conservative' party plays a round-robin game of russian
roulette in which every chamber holds a bullet.

collectively, we make a lot of noise and chatter on the various social media
services. it's encouraging that the occupy movement is global and it's
particularly interesting that it's a 'live' phenomenon, with actual bodies
in place, but most of us settle for adding to the online noise.

certain questions haunt. will the tradeoff of individual privacy for more
public transparencies turn out to be for the best? will all this access to
seemingly infinite seas of information ultimately sharpen or dull our
ability to parse and discern? overall, does the amplification of citizen
voices clarify issues of rights and social balance or does it merely add to
the increasingly deafening cacophony?

oops. gotta run. my frog soup is calling.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #54 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 12 12:48

    

*Alex Steffen weighing in here (#28):

"Paradoxically, perhaps, this feels to me like an optimistic
development. Things need to change profoundly, at systemic levels, and
systemic breakdowns are for the first time in decades putting the
design of those systems (from banking to urbanization to energy to
democratic governance) on the table in a very unavoidable way. Not a
guarantee of a positive outcome, by any means, but at least a
situation to which we can imagine a positive outcome of the right
scope, scale and speed."

*Well, there's something to this assertion, because it's what Camillo
Cavour wanted when he reunified Italy -- a "vast convulsion" that would
break up the stultified peace of Europe.  Cavour got excellent results
by cajoling the French into attacking the Austrians on Italian soil. 
It was mayhem, but he wangled his way through it by some deft leverage.

But this wasn't just a "systemic breakdown," because Cavour's
government had an alternative system entirely ready to roll.  They had
money, guns, the best-trained and best-equipped Italian army, a
constitution and an industrial revolution, plus more railroads than
everybody else in Italy.  So it wasn't THEIR OWN system that was
breaking down but EVERYBODY ELSE's system that was breaking down, and
that was why they got away with it.  Cavour successfully presented his
government as the only ALTERNATIVE to red revolutionary anarchy -- even
though he'd provoked that chaos himself.  

So it's possible to be paradoxically optimistic about systemic
breakdowns, because there are existence proofs of everything working
out for the best, or at least for the rather better.  However, I've got
objections.

First and foremost, as a futurist I'm always suspicious of "optimism"
and "pessimism."  I think they're both objectionable attitudes that
cloud one's understandings of events.  They also cloud the
understanding that getting what you want, or being deprived of what you
want, are temporary conditions and preludes to further complications
somewhere down the line. No victory condition lasts forever.  And
things that are great in one period, like internal combustion, can be
fatal when they're considered always "good."

Also, in our own period we've seen and experienced quite a lot of
"systemic breakdowns." Sometimes they're "velvet revolutions" and they
work out okay -- states can rather implausibly "fail upward,"
especially if they get a lot of sympathetic foreign help.  However, we
also see quite a lot of failed states, global guerrilla areas, hollow
states, "managed democracies," mogul captures of the economy, organized
crime zones, failed American military occupations, and other
unfortunate contemporary conditions.  It's real, real easy to fail
downward.

That's a major historical trend, obviously, but if you follow that
kind of transition-to-nowhere because you think, "well, this is a wave
of change, so I should surf it," that means abandoning civil rights and
the rule of law.  And for what?   You get a new order maybe, but 
quite likely you get a precarious life as former citizens reduced to
wretchedness.   The logical extension of domination by the global
ultra-wealthy, and/or the local warlords, is for everyday people to
become their gangster molls and hired henchmen.  

This prospect may seem like a stretch for Americans who've never
witnessed or experienced that life, but globally, quite a lot of people
do live like this.  Americans solve these problems with cash and
lawsuits.    Other people can't buy their way out of that life, and
they can't sue their way out of that life.  So, basically, they live
like the Corleone family in the Godfather movies; that's what a
failed-state life looks like when Americans do it.  

    Of course the body count's particularly high in that movie,
because it's a drama.  But life looks like that when the state can't
provide any equity or justice.  That role gets filled by some canny
tough-guy with his sons and his consigliere.  The don may have a lot of
street-smarts, but his economy isn't gonna work very well, because
there's way too much personal begging, threatening and knee-bending
involved.  It's a sclerotic and parasitic means of production and
distribution.

I don't think the Tea Party or the OWS are any major shivery threats
to civilization; they're not like the Fascist Black Shirts or the
Chinese Red Guard.  However, they both seem to me like parodic and even
goofier versions of their parent organizations, the Republicans and
the Democrats.  

They're not confronting or resolving the genuine problems that the
Republicans and Democrats so obviously have in running a competent
government.  On the contrary, the Tea Party is a kind of slow-motion
insurrection by people who politically identify with churches and
televangelists.  While the OWS is a very loose cluster of people who
politically identify with flash mobs and social networks; there's not
an OWS guru around who could get elected dog-catcher.

So, you know, "paradoxical optimism."  "The worse, the better," as
Lenin used to cheerily remark.  Yep, the bright side of forest fires is
that they free up a lot of minerals.  What other attitude makes sense
nowadays? 

I'm inclined to think that paradoxical optimism is a major temperament
of our times.  But I'd cut a little closer to the bone and just call
it "dark euphoria."  Because we're not working out solutions
rationally; we're just spitting for luck, and we're rolling the bones.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #55 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:05

    <hidden>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #56 of 240: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:08

    
Ironically, I think the Tea Party and OWS are both responses to the
failure of more conventional institutions to address things like
growing economic inequality and de-industrialization.

The Tea Party is a little trickier to analyze because it is both a
genuine movement of populist political outrage, and a movement
manipulated and in part created by the "Kochtopus."  In a sense, almost
anything you say about it is partially true.

I think the unifying idea of OWS is "the 99%" and that's a very big
idea indeed, and thank you to Adbusters for coming up with it.  I do
not think OWS is a child of the Democratic Party, although it's
probably true that very few of its members would vote Republican.  The
Democratic Party has been as enthusiastic as the GOP in facilitating
the transfer of wealth and power to the 1%.  

The 99%/1% idea is not entirely at odds with some of the notions
motivating the Tea Party, but the emotional mindset and cultural
references and assumptions of the two groups are obviously quite
different.  

I think it is very true that Americans (myself included) have little
or no idea of what even threatened social breakdown looks like.  Sure,
we've had urban riots from time to time, but we always knew that order
would be restored.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #57 of 240: Peter Meuleners (pjm) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:10

    
Good post, Mark.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #58 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:11

    
Bruce sez "The logical extension of domination by the global
ultra-wealthy, and/or the local warlords, is for everyday people to
become their gangster molls and hired henchmen....This prospect may
seem like a stretch for Americans who've never witnessed or experienced
that life, but globally, quite a lot of people do live like this."

This is the state of the world you're embracing, folks, when you're
*voting the warlord ticket.* It's almost a cliche to note that citizens
of the USA are voting hard against their own interests.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #59 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:20

    
<mcdee>: "I think the Tea Party and OWS are both responses to the
failure of more conventional institutions to address things like
growing economic inequality and de-industrialization."

I suppose you're right, but it's not surprising that institutions
that've been gutted and hung out to evaporate in the climate-nouveau
sun fail to address things. It's like when they say a guy who's
bankrupt, homeless, and driven into abject misery should goddamit get a
job, take on some responsibility. He can't even ties his shoes, if
he's lucky enough to have a pair.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #60 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:34

    
Military balloon deploys "Tempest" drone, which deploys "Cicada"
drones.

http://www.wired.com/dangerroom/2012/01/balloon-drones/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #61 of 240: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Fri 6 Jan 12 13:46

    
Fascinating discussion, at which I arrive late. 

One influential catchphrase I didn't see referenced was the one Thomas
Friedman picked up from Infosys' Nandan Nilekani, 'the world is flat.'
Problems used to remain much more drastically localized. Now, they
feedback and build across the planet. And we have bad precedents in
parts of the past for this. In China, the Tang dynasty collapse killed
something like one-third of the population, precisely because previous
Tang successes had created a large peaceful interdependent area in
which a civil warfare end to interdependence turned into a holocaust.
Now we have that kind of situation cubed. Are we worried?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #62 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 12 15:01

    
This interview with Clement Valla suggests aesthetic singularity:
http://rhizome.org/editorial/2012/jan/3/artist-profile-clement-valla/

"At this moment I think human and computer activity is hardly
distinguishable. I am interested in the moments where the typical
distinction is blurred or even inverted. Take Amazon's Mechanical Turk,
billed as artificial-artificial intelligence. Amazon took the name
from an 18th Century automaton that successfully beat humans at chess.
A figurine that looked like a seated Turk sat behind a huge contraption
filled with gear and levers, that would whir and smoke as it played.
It was eventually revealed that the machine was operated by a human
hidden inside. We see here an example of a machine using a human to
accomplish its task; I like to think of it as the machine outsourcing
to a human. In Amazon's Mechanical Turk, they built a system whereby
computer programs can query humans, get responses, and react
accordingly: human aided computation as opposed to computer aided
design."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #63 of 240: Gearteeth (echodog) Fri 6 Jan 12 16:54

    
>Islamic Caliphate...  With the collapse of so many Arab regimes,
these
>guys are in the condition of dogs that caught a taxi.  "Sharia Law"
is
>practically useless for any contemporary purpose, and Arabs never
>agree about anything except forcing non-Arabs to believe.

I'd appreciate some clarification on this point. Do you mean that
adherents of the Islamic Caliphate have lost momentum due to the events
of the Arab Spring? Or that they are unable to take advantage of the
chaos present in those collapse regimes to create the caliphate they
aspire to? Some combination of those points, or something different?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #64 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 12 18:42

    
What gives with the new Predator Shuttle here, one wonders.

http://www.theregister.co.uk/2012/01/06/x_37b_spying_tiangong_1/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #65 of 240: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 6 Jan 12 20:18

    
I wonder if we will see more attempts at national firewalls?

"Speaking to the Guardian on condition of anonymity, an Iranian IT
expert with close knowledge of Iran's national internet project, which
he described as corporate-style intranet, said: "Despite what others
think, intranet is not primarily aimed at curbing the global internet
but Iran is creating it to secure its own military, banking and
sensitive data from the outside world.

"Iran has fears of an outside cyber attack like that of the Stuxnet,
and is trying to protect its sensitive data from being accessible on
the world wide web." Stuxnet, a computer worm designed to sabotage
Iran's uranium enrichment project hit the country's nuclear facilities
in 2010."

<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2012/jan/05/iran-clamps-down-internet-use>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #66 of 240: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Fri 6 Jan 12 20:49

    
Of course Stuxnet didn't get in via the internet.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #67 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Sat 7 Jan 12 04:16

    
A future in which Adbusters is having an actual political effect is
one I really didn't see coming.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #68 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 05:43

    
I just posted this to a private email list, and thought it was worth
repeating here. The discussion was about Vint Cerf's NY Times Op Ed,
source of the quote "Technology is an enabler of rights, not a right
itself." The conversation on the list is about what rights people
should have, how a "right" is defined, what it means to have "rights".
Someone brought up the issue of cost, and I responded: 

A big concern for activists focused on what we have sometimes called
"freedom to connect" is whether we limit practical access by limiting
some access or some quality of access for some users, by tiering
services and costs.  Healthcare presents a similar problem: low-cost
limited health insurance from a company like Assurant is like no
coverage at all; lacking a solid group insurance plan could make a
significant, even life-threatening, difference.

Of course the wealthy often have "more" and "better," but in areas
like communication, healthcare, and education, some of us believe the
playing field should be level.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #69 of 240: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 7 Jan 12 09:43

    <scribbled by julieswn Sat 7 Jan 12 10:19>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #70 of 240: J. Poskanzer (jef) Sat 7 Jan 12 09:47

    <scribbled by julieswn>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #71 of 240: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sat 7 Jan 12 10:19

    
From off-WELL reader Art Dangerfield:

Inspired by the droid that Luke blindly practices his lightsaber on,
NASA put SPHERES on ISS
http://www.universetoday.com/92381/nasa-channels-the-force-with-smart-spheres/


Apparently a "test bed for the development and testing of multi-body
formation flying and other multi-spacecraft control algorithms"

Swarms of autonomous bowling ball satellites in orbit soon. Operated,
of course, by smart phones glued to their sides.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #72 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 12 10:34

    
http://www.balkaninsight.com/en/article/the-changing-face-of-yugoslav-journali
sm

*Here's this 90-year-old veteran Balkan journalist pondering what's
been going on in his region in his long lifetime.  I think this
rumination well illustrates my point about "optimism" and "pessimism"
as attitudes unsuited to futurists.

Sometimes it takes 90 years for a best-case-scenario to show its dark
underside, but it'll have one, somewhere somehow, just like dark clouds
spew their silver linings.  This commentator's currently hanging out
in Slovenia, which was certainly the most fortunate of the wartorn
ex-Yugoslav republics.  Slovenia scrambled out of the Balkan rubble,
joined the EU and basically became the Balkan equivalent of Iowa. 
Peaceful, prosperous, and a little dull.

"When we separated from Yugoslavia," he says, "all that mattered to us
was to achieve the goals we had set for ourselves and the chief goal
was to enter the EU as soon as possible.

"We wanted to have the Euro as currency at any cost because we
believed that to be an ideal and a permanent solution. Now we see that
it was neither ideal and, as it seems, also not a permanent solution.
Slovenia craved the West then, but now Slovenia will have to reflect on
its position...."

So, here's this elderly political observer who's staring at the
tremulous state of the Euro today, and nostalgically regretting the
dignity, stability and international respect that was lost with
Yugoslavia.  How "ironic" that is, right? But it's not irony, it's just
history.  The problem here isn't with Yugoslavia or the European
Union, even though they obviously have problems.  The real problem is
with those concepts of "idealism" and "permanence," because those are
phantoms.

"Idealism" is Platonic of course, but there's a lesser-known classical
notion called "enantiodromia" that Plato, Heraclitus and even Karl
Jung used to carry on about.  Enantiodromia can't be measured with an
"enantiodrometer," so it's not science any more than the Platonic ideal
is.  But whenever people talk to me about eternal human truths, I
contemplate enantiodromia.  Enantiodromia is the dynamic process of
things turning into their opposites.   The metaphysical nature of
things is ornery.  Things aspire to become contrarian.

Good intentions aren't enough.  Power to act isn't enough.  Not only
is "the power to be your best" also the power to be your worst -- the
fact that it IS powerful is likely to conjure up your worst, by
expanding your opportunities for temptation.

A cute little girl is one of the nicest things in the world.  But when
time passes, and you become the mother of a cute little girl, then
it's no good to remain a cute little girl yourself.  That must be
foregone.  Instead, you have to become the little girl's opposite, the
mom.  Mom is a major source of irritation to this cute little girl,
with that ceaseless flow of motherly homilies about standing up
straight and using a fork.  

There's nothing so "timeless" as motherhood, but motherhood is a very
time-bound and dynamic condition.  Nobody who has a baby keeps a baby. 
What you've got there is an instantiation of the human gene-pool, an
entity through whom time flows.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #73 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 12 11:09

    
*I just got this from a bunch of biotech guys who have genetically
hot-wired silkworms to exude super-strong spider-silk. "Hey man, mutant
silkworms, we're all gonna be rich," except, well, maybe not.


"Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information

"Statements in this press release about the Company's future and
expectations other than historical facts are "forward-looking
statements." These statements are made on the basis of management's
current views and assumptions. As a result, there can be no assurance
that management's expectations will necessarily come to pass. 

"These forward-looking statements generally can be identified by
phrases such as "believes," "plans," "expects," "anticipates,"
"foresees," "estimated," "hopes," "develops," "researching,"
"research," "potential," "could" or other words or phrases of similar
import. 

"Similarly, statements in this release that describe the Company's
business strategy, outlook, objectives, plans, intentions or goals
should all be considered forward-looking statements. 

"All such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and
uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from
those in forward-looking statements. 

"Management cautions that its ability to further its research, and
create commercially-viable products may be affected by the competitive
environment, the Company's financial condition and its ability to raise
sufficient capital to meet the financial obligations of its business
plan and to fund its continuing operations.

"This press release does not constitute an offer to sell or the
solicitation of an offer to buy any security and shall not constitute
an offer, solicitation or sale of any securities in any jurisdiction in
which such offer, solicitation or sale would be unlawful prior to
registration or qualification under the securities laws of such
jurisdiction."

*It's great work with the legal boilerplate there, but I'm waiting for
the design-fiction video with supermodels in bulletproofed pantyhose.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #74 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 11:41

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 7 Jan 12 11:42>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #75 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 11:44

    
That's like the fine print on a big pharma advertisement. Common
side-effects are loss of libido and erectile dysfunction, reduction of
or zero semen, nasal congestion (runny/stuffy nose), dizziness and
blurred vision, difficulty sleeping, lightheadedness, body pain or
malaise, stomach upset, diarrhea, upset stomach, muscle and joint pain,
common cold or flu-like symptoms, drowsiness upon awakening, headache,
a drugged feeling, sinusitis, dry mouth, lethargy, back pain,
influenza-like symptoms, constipation and sore throat.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #76 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 12:23

    
Re #72: Impermanence is hard to grasp. When you study Buddhism, you
hear over and over again about emptiness and impermanence and there's a
resistance. Wisdom emerges as the resistance wears away, and
resistance wears away as you see endless of examples of impermanence in
your own life.

From the Heart Sutra:
 
"There is no suffering, no cause of suffering, 
no end to suffering, no path to follow. 
There is no attainment of wisdom, 
and no wisdom to attain."

Contradictions abound, not resolvable without a deep and compelling
transformation of some kind, a perspective change. We don't go there.
We persist in ego, believe our own bullshit, haggle about work and pay
and politics, complain endlessly, and too many of us die knowing less
than we knew when we were born.

Wise men realize that you can't explain any of this, so they don't
try. They just laugh. I'm not laughing yet, dang it.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #77 of 240: Popular purveyors of wantonness. (tux) Sat 7 Jan 12 13:13

    
Here's my question where's the FringeWare of 201X? I think it cannot
be on the internet for sure, because things can never be really
*different* here any more. There can be no purveyour of strangeness,
it's all so *neat*. 2011 was the year when the Spectacle really got a
good grip on the internet, and 2012 will choke it off. It's perfectly
painless these days to get a good answer to almost any question on the
net, maybe it's even getting a lot harder to get a bad or out of
context answer. Slim chance of serendipity, because the recommendation
systems and knowledge management apparatus is just getting too
pervasive. There's no room for "the other" on the web, because either
it's invisible because search algorithmns won't allow it to surface or
its otherness is instantly swamped up by the carnevalesque laissez-fare
bchan spirit of the internet, turning any idea into mindless quotidian
mush. Or maybe I'm using the wrong search engine, but I find it
increasingly difficult of escaping "the bubble"
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #78 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sat 7 Jan 12 13:31

    
And here's an optimistic point of view for space travel over the next
40 years:

http://io9.com/5873485/an-optimistic-history-of-the-next-40-years
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #79 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 12 14:18

    
You know what would be great?  Some "paradoxical pessimism."  

Like: things are apparently going just great for everybody, but, as a
career contrarian, you get to dash out a few invigorating paragraphs
about how, in reality, this universal joy and prosperity may be a real
drag.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #80 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 12 14:34

    
"And here's an optimistic point of view for space travel over the next
40 years:"

http://io9.com/5873485/an-optimistic-history-of-the-next-40-years

*Sorry to report that the "optimism" here isn't doing much for me;
this just seems blatantly silly:

"By 2040:  Human outposts on the Moon and Mars are now expanding to
become independent colonies. But that is not the only ‘life' now in
space. Sometime near the end of the decade, the "singularity" (also
called the "eclipsing of humanity") occurs. Artificial intelligence
surpasses the intellectual prowess of humans and shortly thereafter
becomes self aware. Fears of human destruction from this new form of
life fade when the AI entities refuse to be used for war...."

*This is about as likely as Predator drones "refusing to be used for
war." If we've got to invoke the Singularity to improve our moods, we
might as well cut to the chase and transform the planet Earth into one
solid crystal of computational neutronium. 

I happen to be quite the fan of unmanned space exploration.  The solar
system's veritably swarming with drones right now.  There are awesome
alien vistas pouring in in torrents.  It's hard to get people to look,
though.  You can show 'em all the methane monsoons on Titan that you
want, but they refuse to perceive that stuff as real-estate.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #81 of 240: for dixie southern iraq (stet) Sat 7 Jan 12 15:00

    
Right now, the robots keep getting better and better while the humans
are as heavy as ever, still need to be oxidated and fed and hydrated;
no urgent reason to use 'em except PR. But as soon as the 'bots find
the right something, the humans will be up there quick. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #82 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 18:40

    
Those bots are handy: if we ever decide  we have to split, we should
have a pretty good idea where else we can go and how to get there.

Bots can be our eyes and ears, and they can extend our brains as well,
but I can't fathom how an "artificial intelligence" - a man-made
intelligence - can be any more than it was programmed to be. The idea
that machines can "surpass the intellectual prowess of humans and
become self-aware" is a YARF ("yet another religious fantasy"). Can't
imagine how that top keeps spinning.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #83 of 240: Kenny Mann (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 12 18:50

    
Via email from Kenny Mann:

How are things today essentially different -- worldwide -- than the
Weimar republic before it all went kerblooie? (Nazi vs. Bauhaus noise,
coarsely filtered by Delightful Decadence.)

Gotta be just-and-only that "The room is the smartest person in the
room" thing.

Mebbe "the room" knows how to keep the petard un-hoist, while we
dither individually semi-informed and misapprehensive, ready to
misattribute our fears and the heroics we expect to allay those fears?

As such, should we even bother to work-up the Architectural Digest
version of the outlook? (Other than to be entertained by the
floorplan.)

I sincerely believe we are best at collectively substantiating each
other's well-informed intuitions, despite zen-of-identity trickiness.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #84 of 240: Skeptical Technocrat (fair) Sat 7 Jan 12 21:56

    
Paradoxical pessimism? Hmm ... how about:

"Just think how wonderful it will be when housing in the USA finally
is allowed to drop to its market-clearing prices, and we know what all
the mortgage-backed securities are actually worth!" (and, wow, lots of
affordable housing since we overbuilt!)"

"Peak oil has come & gone, but the oil markets haven't noticed! Oh,
wait, isn't oil floating around $100/bbl? Less than it was in the
summer of 2008, but hey, soon we'll be fueling our cars with el-cheapo
fracked natural gas! Whammo! Our "dependence on foreign oil" problem
solved!" (Canada isn't *really* foreign, is it?)

As for the rest, well, it's really just arguing over money ...
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #85 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 05:06

    
Virginia Postrel writes how the Chinese government is cutting funding
for educational programs producing graduates who can't find work. How
many educational programs would we cut in the USA, if we adopted this
policy?
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/answer-sheet/post/how-art-history-majors-p
ower-the-us-economy/2012/01/06/gIQAUv36hP_blog.html

Postrel's is a very good piece that ultimately gets to the real value
of any education in teaching "habits of mind" like "how to analyze
texts carefully, how to craft and evaluate arguments, and how to apply
microeconomic reasoning, along with basic literacy in accounting and
statistics." In other words, the value of specific job skills may come
and go; we should be teaching students fundamentals about how to think
critically, skills that are applicable to any job.

One "state of the world" is that other countries are getting smarter
while the U.S. is cutting education as one result of the ongoing effort
to strangle government. (If you think I'm wrong about that effort,
just note the contemporary influence of Abramoff crony Grover Norquist,
author of the "Taxpayer Protection Pledge," who infamously quipped
"I'm not in favor of abolishing the government. I just want to shrink
it down to the size where we can drown it in the bathtub.")

As we cut all levels of education in the U.S., including funding for
some colleges and college-level programs, tuitions are increasing
beyond the means of many Americans. As a result, a college education
will be available only to the elite.

In a world where some nations value higher education for all, as a
matter of policy the U.S. seeks to make education of any quality less
available. You might argue that this is prudent, because jobs are
unavailable for all sorts of graduates with all sorts of skills. 

Implications for the state of the world might be that the U.S. will
have less smarts, and less power, wealth, and influence. But it's
probably fallacious to see the distribution of power in terms of
national borders, which are becoming less relevant in a global economy
where the real power is in corporations, not nation-states.

I don't necessarily argue that the world is any worse off in this case
than it's been before. It's just a different distribution of wealth
and power, no?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #86 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 12 05:10

    
Future Work Skills

These seem about right.

http://apolloresearchinstitute.com/node/52
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #87 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 12 08:06

    
Some more grist for the mill, future projections from Charles Stross:

http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2012/01/world-building-301-some-pr
ojec.html
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #88 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 12 08:54

    
http://www.time.com/time/health/article/0,8599,2074067-2,00.html

I'm often annoyed by TIME's peppy populism in science articles, but
there may be something to this idea that the metabolic structure of
memory is inherently "optimistic."  People, and our prehuman ancestors,
evolved to survive, not to remember things perfectly or to weigh
evidence without bias.

People are demonstrably sappy about themselves.  Like: sure, your
teeth will rot out in the long run if you gorge yourself on sugar, but
me?  No way!  And even if my teeth do fall out -- hey, on me, that
looks good.

For a long time, it's struck me that people who make genuinely
sensible and rational decisions about their own well-being lead an
oddly joyless existence.  For instance, Nordic countries rank high on
almost every scale of well-being and development, but when you go hang
out with them, they're by no means a cheery bunch of guys and gals. 
It's not just self-discipline or too much prudence.  It's like they're
lacking some kind of mental vitamin.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #89 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 12 09:12

    
http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2012/01/world-building-301-some-pr
ojec.html

*My goodness me, Stross is really working hard on those.  He's making
me and Lebkowsky look like laidback Austin slackers.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #90 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 12 09:17

    
*There may, conceivably, be methane-breathing fish in the lakes of
Titan.  Yeah, it's a stretcher.  But given big gooey lakes, even
non-water ones with unknown ultra-cold chemistry, I don't find fish too
implausible.

http://www.space.com/6886-exotic-life-sprout-titan-chemistry.html

*I reckon a sub-zero equipped abyssal-vents drone is in order.
However, if there are indeed living fish on Titan, then I'd rather
expect some zillionaire lunatic to go harpoon one.  Seriously. No
matter how little economic or political sense this might make.  Because
they're there, that's why.

*They wouldn't live there, they'd just bring the methane Moby back and
mount it next to the Tyrannosaur in the living room.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #91 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 12 09:24

    
People are always gonna say, "surely this is Weimar Germany again, all
hope is lost" but here's somebody else saying, "this is 1977 again,
there is NO FUTURE. Again."

http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/07/punk-fashion-sex-pistols

*Except it's a "no future" for posh rich people this time.  Posh punk.
 I don't quite know why I like that idea, but I do.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #92 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 09:58

    
Odd that _The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo_, a novel that "offers a
thoroughly ugly view of human nature" (per the NY Times review), is so
globally successful. (Lisbeth Salander of TGWTDT evidently inspired the
punk resurgence mentioned in The Guardian.) There's much ugliness
reflected in contemporary media - another example is "Bellflower," a
film we mostly watched recently, couldn't quite get through it.
Depression, violence, gore... supposed to be cathartic? I was surprised
to see Bellflower make a ten best list or two, I suppose because it
was visually striking. 

Not that I expect cheerful splashes of good humor, but pointless
violence is... pointless.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #93 of 240: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Sun 8 Jan 12 10:03

    
Huh?  The villains are truly evil, and the good guys win.  And written by 
a guy who had put himself in real danger exposing real-life evil.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #94 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 11:36

    
The original success of those books resonates with Bruce's
observations about Nordic sensibility, I suppose. One riddle: why
didn't he attempt to publish them?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #95 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 11:48

    <scribbled by jonl Sun 8 Jan 12 15:14>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #96 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 15:30

    
Microsoft patented "pedestrian route production" that includes
"bad route avoidance":
http://hothardware.com/News/Microsoft-Wants-to-Make-You-a-More-Efficient-Pedes
trian-Patents-Bad-Route-Avoidance/

We were hiking a trail yesterday, it was getting dark, we weren't
exactly lost but didn't know how far along the trail we had gone,
whether we could outwalk sunset. I consulted Google Maps via iPhone,
retrieved a map that showed our position and direction. I could see
that the road was reachable before the light's fade into night. We
augmented our reality without a thought. Example of an augmented
reality/geolocation mashup that we've integrated seamlessly. Taking it
to the pedestrian level didn't require extra synapses, it just
followed.

It's a bit weird to see that Microsoft has a patent on something like
that.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #97 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Sun 8 Jan 12 15:36

    
Here's some fun...collaborate on predicting the future of computing at
the New York Time, and learn a bit of history too:

http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2011/12/06/science/20111206-technology-time
line.html?ref=science
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #98 of 240: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Sun 8 Jan 12 16:56

    <scribbled by jonl Sun 8 Jan 12 17:04>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #99 of 240: George Mokray (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 12 17:05

    
From George Mokray via email:

The demos around the world have not been sparked by #OWS.  They were
sparked by local conditions and the examples of Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen,
Bahrain, and, for the Western democracies, Spain, a really interesting
case because it is a "second order" demonstration - not against a
dictator but against a "democratic" system that is not working for the
people.  It is especially interesting because the indignados of Spain
have also been strategizing over how to have an electoral presence. 
The latest election there saw the installation of a conservative
government but the number of people who refused to vote increased. 
Perhaps one way to subvert the dominant paradigm is to refuse to vote
en masse, as in Jose Saramago's novel _Seeing_.  (It would be
fascinating to see Saramago join Alan Moore as the inspiration for an
international movement.)

We are in the midst of a global change, a revolt against corporate
globalization and for person-to-person globalization.  This is not
something I've seen recognized in most of the reporting about these
things.   The technology speeds things up but is not the essential
feature.  As Waleed Rashed of Egypt's April 6 Movement said last Spring
at MIT, electronic media was useful but they made sure the taxi
drivers knew what was going on too.

Old people in cities looking worriedly at an angry sky is the probable
future especially since a) almost all climate scientists have no idea
of how to communicate with the general public, b) the geoengineering
solutions offered are primarily mechanistic and few ecologists and
systems thinkers have been invited to the party, and c) two of the five
wealthiest people in the world think dealing responsibly with climate
change will adversely affect their bottom line (PBS' Nova is partially
supported by the David Koch Foundation, almost as good as the MIT
climate change symposium for the Knight Science Fellows recommending as
a good place for lunch the Koch Cafeteria in the new Koch Center for
Integrative Cancer Research at the 'Tute).  There are lots of things we
could be doing to buy ourselves some time but we don't talk about them
because they would require us to change.  I especially like reducing
black carbon because, to do it well, means that we have to help the
poorest of the poor replace their three stone fires with something much
more efficient.  But who cares about those kind of people?

To quote Chairman Bruce on "pedestrian route production":  Young
people growing up today will not know what lost is.  They all have
satellite locators in their purses and pockets.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #100 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 12 05:37

    
From Will Tomlinson, via email:

Re:  the 99/1% conversation, I found this, from the current issue of
the New Yorker, particularly interesting:
"In recent years, certain hedge funds have started investing in
class-action lawsuits, providing up-front capital to cover the
expenses of a case in exchange for an equity share in a successful
outcome. These arrangements are unregulated and controversial."
-->How prevalent is this going to be in 10 years? Can companies be
allowed to take stakes in cases against them? (or rather, can they be
prevented from so doing...)

Re: Strossian "Cool New Shit." - Someone, somewhere, sometime in the
next 30 years, is going to hack the ocean. "Physical counts of viruses
in the oceans from concentrated ocean water, using electron
microscopy, indicate that, in total, the world's oceans harbor about
10^31 viral particles. The majority of these particles appear to be
tailed phages (large DNA-containing virions). Measurements of viability
suggest that the half-life of these phages is less than 1 day." -LP
Villarreal <-- I'm no expert, but presumably we can figure out some way
to prod that in a useful direction?

Things I couldn't be bothered to google the existence or nonexistance
of:

are there QR codes printed everywhere that say something like "you
just lost the game" ?

something like google goggles, but with high quality (read: high frame
rate) cameras enabling overlay of data based on the structured light
of the scene - the flickering of a neon sign is a stream of somehow
relevant data emanating from a noodle bar, overlayed, alongside the
blinking of a bike light which is a twitter handle

Those parking elevators they have in vacant lots in dense areas?
Airstream trailer park based on those as a scaffold in (or out) of
warehouses. Shit/Electric/Water hoses everywhere. Faraday-paint all
over them, EM-sensitive enclave, only data transmission via structured
light, TEMPEST-spec boxes as lifestyle choice. don't like it? move.

near field communication (or bluetooth scored on signal strength)
-based game called Schmooze, score based on proximity to others,
duration, weighted by score of others. Bonus, overlay psychic
vampirism ARG onto it without knowledge of "prey".

ARG / marketing game wherein clues hidden in strangely atonal /
Deerhoof-esque promo songs are in fact Commodore 64 programs which
must either be transcoded and emulated or, preferably, recorded onto
cassette tape and actually played. Like that thing aphex twin and NIN
and everyone else did encoding visual information into audio tracks
via spectrogram, but cooler. Fuck, why are these goddamned things so
prevalent? Blue Ant, but stupider.

Furthermore, fully functional c64 on a chip, on a ring. Computational
minimalism as art movement. Jewelery of functional machines. perhaps
an OLED display. Demoscene coders become haute couture playmakers.

How related are multicam/digital camo and moire patterns? tradeoff
between eluding human perceptual apparatus and machine virtual
processing becomes less important as people get this machine vision
stuff to work right? The work of art as something visible/salient to
humans but not to machines, probably based on optical illusion. The
analogy to video games that exploit flaws unique to meatspace
hardware, can't be emulated accurately without transistor level
drudgery.

At what point do you allow your phone to be rooted as part of a
promotional scheme by entertainment companies? Scout Mob roots the
people instead of the phone. Easier? Market research is a stack of
burners. [Kids love detective stories. They also love movies. And
games. And iPhones. This month, enter sherlock-verse and unlock
awesome trailers and free candy on your iphone. It's 2AM, time to
gather demographic information on your parents. You are 13, right?]
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #101 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 12 06:01

    
"The 99%" is catchy, but you have to be clear that these global
demonstrations and "occupations" are really just mobs of people. All
we're sure they have in common is that they're pissed off because
they're increasingly aware how powerless they are, and they sense a
potential to be empowered in some way. Whether that's possible is a
question. Has the Arab Spring really changed the power structure in the
Middle East in a way that empowers those people who took to the
streets? Has Occupy Wall Street had any impact on the way we do
(political) business in the U.S.? 

Mobs don't become alternate governments unless they organize, and real
leaders emerge. More likely, a mob will be manipulated by canny
political entrepreneurs. Occupy has resisted that fate, but there's
been no visible organization so far, and no leaders have emerged. In
fact, Occupy resists the concept of leadership in favor of collective
decision-making. Anyone who's spent years working even the smallest
projects will see the problem here.

The developed nations are large and complex and have evolved
bureaucracies that feel stifling to many, hence a move to the right and
a call for less government. But if you have "less government" you also
have less to impede the emergence of tyrannies and the unregulated
exploitation of people and resources. The "opposite" of the mob is
dictatorship, one leader emerges and imposes his will over all.

The best case for governance is that it's balanced, organized around
some set of principles, and we have civility. How do we get there?

Maybe if we could gamify governance, we'd get better attention and
action from the new crop of citizens. My generation worked all day,
then watched television - limited interaction, cognitive surplus
misspent.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #102 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 12 06:16

    
We often say that the Internet is rewiring our brains, changing the
way we think. Here's an inventory of those changes:
http://www.onlinecollege.org/15-big-ways-the-internet-is-changing-our-brain
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #103 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 12 07:13

    
Here's a surviving "psychedelic dreamtime" pitch. It's about eating
psychedelic mushrooms as a spiritual adventure. Interestingly, it's (a)
mostly a historical lecture, (b) Dutch, and (c) framed as part of a
Maker scene.

http://www.mediamatic.net/page/233314/en

http://www.mediamatic.net/page/230855/en

Plus, given that it's from "Mediamatic,"  it's probably best described
as a "tactical media bio-art intervention."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #104 of 240: Fron Anders Nygaard (captward) Mon 9 Jan 12 09:11

    
From Anders Nygaard via e-mail:

Interesting interpretation of nordic social culture @#88 - one I do
not particularily recognize myself or any of my friends in :) Which
brought on a thought. Gamification techniques appear to have proven to
be extremely effective for some limited applications, such as the
much-advertised AIDS protein breaktrough. (However, they carry some
extremely worrying side effects, such as a risk of serious
psychological addiction in a small number of users, and the main
commercial application so far have been in enabling social game
designers to sell form with no actual content whatsoever. Is this
something we really want to apply to governance - that is, the
operation of our most vital life support systems?)

The point being that gamification seems to be a new and interesting
angle on a phenomenon we might term storyfication - persuasion carried
out by exploiting our tendency to think and expect in terms of
stories, and experience a feeling of reward when we observe stories
play out as expected. The story of "attaining wealth, but at the cost
of true joy" is a familiar example of such a thought-pattern. While
various subsets of this exploit or blind spot in the human mind is
clearly in use everywhere in the world today and has been for
centuries, isn't the growth of these forms of propaganda - and the
resultant slow reduction of all public debate into inchoerent shouting
matches, wish-fulfilment or even pure grey speech - part of the
problem, rather than a potential part of a solution?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #105 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 9 Jan 12 13:26

    
The Rise of the Megacity via Big Think.

http://bigthink.com/ideas/41833?utm_source=Daily+Ideafeed+Newsletter&utm_campa
ign=bf9f288d0a-Daily_Ideafeed_January_9_2012&utm_medium=email


Today, 600 urban cities generate about 60 percent of the world’s GDP,
according to a recent report by McKinsey Global Institute. By 2025,
some of those cities will fall off the top 600 and 136 new cities will
make the list, all of which are from the developing world and 100 of
which will be from China. The report forecasts “new hot spots emerging
and household wealth surging in little-known urban centers," and
advises that companies may have to adopt "a much finer-grained approach
to tap into the growth that lies ahead.” 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #106 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 12 14:55

    
Why Do Nations Fail?
http://www.hoover.org/publications/defining-ideas/article/103766

Re. Arab spring:

"The big question is: Is this going to be a political revolution like
the Glorious Revolution in England, which unleashed a fundamental
process of transformation in the political system with associated
economic changes? Ultimately, such political revolutions are
fundamental to the growth of nations. That’s one of the arguments we
make.

"Or is it going to be the sort of revolution like the Bolshevik
Revolution or the independence movements in much of sub-Saharan Africa
in the 1960s, where there was a change in political power, but it went
from one group to another, which then re-created the same system and
started the same sort of exploitative process as the previous one?"
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #107 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 12 19:31

    
People who don't tell stories think stories  count for a lot.  I'm
something of a skeptic there.  I'd agree that "point of view is worth
80 IQ points," but these ideological framing devices aren't the same
thing as "stories."  There aren't that many different "stories" in the
sense of basic, compelling dramatic narratives.  Once you learn how
stories work and how to tell them, stories don't surprise you much. 
There's very little innovation in storytelling.  "Stories" centuries
old work as well or better than contemporary ones.

I don't wanna slander Nordic people for being cliched Ingmar Bergman
Henrik Ibsen gloomsters -- because I hang out with Slavs, who are
second to none in that regard -- but the "Jumbo Book of Scandinavian
Joie de Vivre" would be about ten pages long. 

I really like and admire Holland, and I go there every time I get the
chance -- they look-and-feel like the only real civilization in the
world, sometimes.  But the better I know them, the more I worry about
'em.  They suffer, though I don't know why.  Dutch men in particular 
seem deeply uneasy in the Netherlands.  I've seen Dutch guys in jolly,
expansive, affirmative moods, but only when they're hundreds of
kilometers away from home.  Try telling a Dutch guy, "man, your
country's super, you've really got it going on."  He won't agree with
you.  Your guess is as good as mine.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #108 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 12 21:45

    
I spent four hours tonight as part of a focus group talking about the
future of something - I don't think I'm supposed to say what we were
talking about or repeat what we said, but I can say that I sensed an
optimism, resilience, and trust in the future within that group. Not
that they didn't moan a bit and express occasional fear and loathing,
but overall they were a cheerful bunch.

I've also been spending a lot of time with consumer advocates, and I'm
impressed with their persistent faith in a system of governance, and
their profound hope that wrongs can be set right. Among advocates in
general there's an acknowledgement that the struggle never ends, and at
the same time a belief that things can be better. I admire those
people, and I get a lot of satisfaction from working with 'em.

Last night we watched Lars von Trier's "Melancholia," a film inspired
by the insight that people who're depressed handle the worst situations
better than most, because they expect the worst - it doesn't shock or
surprise them. As worlds collide and heat-death is imminent, depressive
Justine keeps it together while her normally stolid sister Claire
explodes in a fit of panic and despair.

The always cool, possibly coulrophobic Loren Coleman has a top ten
list of evil clowns:
http://copycateffect.blogspot.com/2012/01/evil-clowns-2011.html
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #109 of 240: From Kenny Mann (captward) Tue 10 Jan 12 01:51

    
From Kenny Mann via e-mail:


The obvious way to ridicule "No future," is to point out that we've
had all kinds of no future for, like, centuries. (The future of no
future can only get sillier, even if there isn't one at some point.)
I'm just wondering why we keep wasting lives on pre-staging the
occasional huge nearly-apocalyptic events -- which we actually seem to
get worse at fulfilling, despite all the intricately elaborate planning
that goes into them. Almost -- but not quite -- makes one want to be
there for it, just to see exactly what might resolve the oceans of
detailed anticipation. 

BTW: There was some of the pop version of "The Endtimes" in the late
sixties, too. Maybe an avid follower of Jan Wenner can pull some pieces
out of the Rolling Stone archive. All we ever got was Altamont, which
was almost tolerable from forty rows back, comparatively. Even the
horrible waste of humanity in Viet Nam sputtered out (on some fairly
comic theatrics).

We know better. Why do we find it so convenient to misplace our sense
of these things at regular intervals and go partly off the pretty good
rails? Why do I expect the okay-topian future to be a done-deal? Is it
only about never quite getting the deck sorted well enough for winning
hands all around or do we have jokers who are that maniacally
determined?

The things we add to the mix at each new era portend better than worse
-- and then we find a way to cook it wrong, but even there, the
kibitzers are very nicely prepared, lately.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #110 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 10 Jan 12 05:17

    
One future of new economics, from the ground up:

http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/12/mf_neuwirth_qa/all/1

White, gray, and black markets take to tech. May really kick in when
3D printers improve, makers communities, and creatives get involved.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #111 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 06:08

    
This link, and quote from the video, were posted to a private email
list I'm on:

"We Will Force You to be Free"
a documentary by Adam Curtis
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFjCJFsbS0U&feature=related

Also refer to Isaiah Berlin's "Two Concepts of Liberty":
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two_Concepts_of_Liberty

"... negative liberty has transformed itself into what [Isaiah] Berlin
had warned against.  it has become a version of its opposite -
positive liberty. Our political leaders  have the power to decide what
is the right kind of individual, and punish those who do not conform to
that ideal.   

"But there is one thing that makes our freedom today different from
positive liberty. Positive liberty is driven by a vision that freedom
is for something, the freedom to do or to become something new, out of
which a better world will come. Negative liberty has no such vision. It
isn't for anything.  At its heart, it has no purpose other than to
keep us free from necessary constraint or harm.

"And in using force to create a world based on negative liberty, the
democratic revolutions have actually led millions of people abroad into
a world without purpose or meaning. This idea of freedom is still
portrayed by many politicians and intellectual commentators as a
universal absolute. They assume that it is only a matter of time before
it spreads throughout the world. But this may not be true.

"As this series has shown, the idea of freedom that we live with today
is a narrow and limiting one that was born out of a specific and
dangerous time, the Cold War. It may have had meaning and purpose then
as an alternative to communist tyranny, but now it has become a
dangerous trend.

"Our [UK] government relies on a simplistic economic model of human
beings that allows inequality to grow and offers nothing positive in
the face of the reactionary forces they have helped to awaken and
unleash upon the world.  If we ever want to escape from this limited
worldview, we will have to rediscover the positive progressive ideas of
freedom, and realize that Isaiah Berlin was wrong. Not all positive
attempts to change the world for the better will lead to tyranny."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #112 of 240: Walt Dangerfield (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 07:18

    
Via email from Walt Dangerfield:

I find the Hoover Institute link pretty hilarious, allow me to
demonstrate:

"Is this going to be a political revolution like the Glorious
Revolution in [China], which unleashed a fundamental process of
transformation in the political system with associated economic
changes? Ultimately, such political revolutions are fundamental to the
growth of nations. That’s one of the arguments we make.

Or is it going to be the sort of revolution like the [American]
Revolution or the independence movements in much of [Eastern Europe in
the 1980s], where there was a change in political power, but it went
from one group to another, which then re-created the same system and
started the same sort of exploitative process as the previous one?"


I guess I'm not that interested in analysis of what Occupy and the
Indignados movements stood for or have accomplished. If you doubt they
have had a material impact on political discourse in the U.S. I
suggest you go back and look at the news cycle before they started.
The only response in the media to the economy had been to trumpet
government concerns about the deficit and the need for austerity.

To dismiss them as "just mobs of people" seems like the most effete
rationalization of instinctive elitism I can imagine. That they are
disenfranchised is a given. What they demand seems pretty clear as
well, if incomprehensible to those in positions of political and media
power. Liberals abandoned the cause of economic justice in the 1960s
and haven't been comfortable addressing the issue since. It's what
caused the working class in much of America to switch parties. At
least the Conservatives had some language about lifting all the boats.

I suspect that once the "meaningless election side-show" ends (a
Taibbi coinage:
http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/blogs/taibblog/iowa-the-meaningless-sides
how-begins-20120103
) and the weather turns we will begin to see the occupations return to
importance. The networks that occupying public spaces allowed them to
build still exist. As John Robb likes to say, they've built an
open-source market of ideas and now simply need to respond to
innovation.

I like this graph of tactical innovation in the American Civil Rights
movement:
http://rortybomb.wordpress.com/2011/12/05/occupy-foreclosures-and-a-chart-of-c
hanging-tactical-innovations-in-protest-movements/

That isn't to say I think the Indignados and Occupiers should emulate
the activists of the 60s in anything other than their ability to adapt
to new innovations. Occupations are the opposite of marches and
rallies for good reason. Critics like to talk of the impotence of
Occupy, but nothing is more impotent today than those tired tactics.

In October 2010 the NAACP, AFL-CIO and other groups organized a march
on Washington with tens of thousands of working people and people of
color to demand the government begin to address the terrible economic
situation and make job creation its priority. The march received
almost no media coverage and more than a year later we can see that it
did not accomplish its goals, and did not begin a change in political
discourse. Less than a month after the march a couple of basic cable
TV stars held a rally in the same place to "demand sanity," a
politically nebulous and purposefully meaningless phrase, which of
course attracted the corporate media who loves a spectacle without
meaning.

I'll leave the question of whether that rally achieved its goals to
the reader.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #113 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 07:25

    
"ccupy and the
Indignados movements stood for or have accomplished. If you doubt they
have had a material impact on political discourse in the U.S. I
suggest you go back and look at the news cycle before they started.
The only response in the media to the economy had been to trumpet
government concerns about the deficit and the need for austerity."

Demonstrations and media engagement can no doubt have an effect, but
are not necessarily transformative. If there's no effective
organization, we'll be back to business as usual soon enough. And I
don't mean organizing bigger and better demonstrations. Think of the
Civil Rights movement: if it had been nothing but a series of
demonstrations it wouldn't have had the same effect, but the Civil
Rights movement had leaders and was very effective in organizing
politically. If Occupy's doing the same kind of effective organizing, I
can't see it. (I acknowledge that doesn't necessarily mean it isn't
happening at some level).
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #114 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 12 07:51

    
http://cnettv.cnet.com/parrot-ar-drone-2-0-unarmed-flying-film/9742-1_53-50117
908.html

On the ever-expanding drone front, I see that the as-yet-unarmed toy
Parrot Drone 2.0 now features bat sonar.

Check out YouTube for a lot of alarmingly aggressive and in-your-face
Parrot Drone videos.  Imagine these gizmos with a single-shot .22
zipgun on board.

http://youtu.be/ht_seyL-quo
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #115 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 12 08:12

    
http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2012/01/invincible-tb-india/

I hate to mention this year's emergence of "Totally Drug-Resistant
Tuberculosis," because it plays into the hands of travel-security
paranoiacs and makes everybody stare in hypochondriac horror at a wet
kleenex.  It's an unpleasant topic, but unwise to ignore.  

Sometimes epidemics trump demographics.  It takes a hell of an
epidemic to do that, because even AIDS hasn't stopped urbanization and
the contemporary age structure; but sometimes there really are  hellish
epidemics. They're in the historical record.  

I've fretted for a long time about a possible confluence of epidemics
and failed states. The free market never cured malaria.

Lately, I've been in a private discussion with some security-minded
futurists about the alleged difficulty of making bio-warfare
supergerms. But you don't have to make them; you can also find them.

Imagine the fun if this new bug were to show up in an Occupy camp.  
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #116 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 12 08:36

    
Crowdsourcing tuberculosis research. Hurry, Internet.

http://poptech.org/blog/collaboration_alert_sarah_fortune_and_lukas_biewald
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #117 of 240: From Walt Dangerfield (captward) Tue 10 Jan 12 10:04

    
Walt Dangerfield, via e-mail:

Charlie Stross went off on the possibility of large epidemics in that
link earlier as well. He mentions the increasing exposure of bugs long
hidden in the wilderness to human hosts. It's certainly a real threat
and I'd like to see governments putting more resources into combating
plagues than terrorism.

On the other hand we're still making huge strides in gene sorting.
Tackling tuberculosis @home will be a lot easier when your smartphone
can scan some saliva and tell you which particular strain is infecting
you and which combination of antibacterials to apply. Also I just
noticed the deprecation in the SETI@home suffix when computers go in
your pocket.

Low-cost, accurate gene sorting seems like it will really change the
medical topography. Is this a tech that has been on the horizon long
enough to become passe? Or is it one that will continually recede as
we realize how much more complex its realization would be?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #118 of 240: From Walt Dangerfield (captward) Tue 10 Jan 12 10:32

    
Walt Dangerfield, via e-mail:

Speaking of iphone doctors, new XPrize to create a Star Trek style
tricorder:
<http://ces.cnet.com/8301-33363_1-57356116/a-star-trek-inspired-x-prize-for-rev
olutionizing-health-care/>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #119 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 12 11:24

    

"Where Is Italy Going?"  Here's an English-language commentator, Alex
Roe, who thinks that Italian politics have taken a major turn for the
better.

http://italychronicles.com/where-is-italy-going/

Roe (@newsfromitaly) says:  "Really, all Monti wants to do is to make
Italy function properly. Whether Monti intends modelling Italy after
the United States, Germany, or the United Kingdom is not clear. 
Denmark has been named in Italy’s newspapers a few times and appears to
be seen as an exemplary nation.  Perhaps Monti would like Italy to
become southern Europe’s equivalent of Denmark?"

Well, that's not going to happen, whether Monti wants that or not.  It
does amuse me, though, because in my new short story collection GOTHIC
HIGH-TECH, there's a story about a future Europe, "White Fungus," in
which this mordant line appears:

"In stark reality, Europe was swiftly becoming a giant half-mafia
flea-market where even Denmark behaved like Sicily."

So if Denmark can be Sicily, then Sicily can be Denmark, right?  You
bet!  If you can build a bakery in an abandoned Fiat plant, then an
abandoned bakery oughta be able to build cars!

Roe: "Beset with cronyism and corruption, Italy is not perceived as
being an easy country to manage by Italians."

I think this has pretty well got it backward.  Italy actually IS
"cronyism and corruption," in the sense that Italy's got amazingly high
"social capital" and terrific personal trust-networks.  Italy is a
civilization that's "beset"  with a government and an economy.  

Italians never had a national government until 1861, because Italians
lived in a set of exquisitely civilized and extremely sinister towns. 
If other people hadn't invented nation-states, Italians would never
have adapted one.  Monti is a technocrat who'd like to see that
artificial thing function properly, but it's worn out better guys than
him.

So "where is Italy going?"  Well, I'm inclined to agree with Roe that
at least it's more-or-less "going," and that alone is a major
difference from a year ago.  

Maybe the speculators will somehow let them live -- because otherwise
the rich will have no place to go on holiday.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #120 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 11:55

    
Meanwhile another big quake in Indonesia triggers a tsunami warning:
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-16497747
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #121 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Tue 10 Jan 12 13:17

    
Reality check. Doomsday Clock set to 5 minutes til Midnight:

http://www.thebulletin.org/content/media-center/announcements/2012/01/10/dooms
day-clock-moves-to-five-minutes-to-midnight
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #122 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 12 17:55

    

"Doomsday Clock moves to five minutes to midnight
10 JANUARY 2012

(...)

"Few of the Bulletin's recommendations of 2010 have been taken up;
they still require urgent attention if we are to avert catastrophe from
nuclear weapons and global warming.  At a minimum these include:

"Ratification by the United States and China of the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty and progress on a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty;

"Implementing multinational management of the civilian nuclear energy
fuel cycle with strict standards for safety, security, and
nonproliferation of nuclear weapons, including eliminating reprocessing
for plutonium separation;

"Strengthening the International Atomic Energy Agency's capacity to
oversee nuclear materials, technology development, and its transfer;

"Adopting and fulfilling climate change agreements to reduce carbon
dioxide emissions through tax incentives, harmonized domestic
regulation and practice;

"Transforming the coal power sector of the world economy to retire
older plants and to require in new plants the capture and storage of
the CO2 they produce;

"Vastly increasing public and private investments in alternatives to
carbon emitting energy sources, such as solar and wind, and in
technologies for energy storage, and sharing the results worldwide.
The Clock is ticking."

-Science and Security Board, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists


*Well, the imaginary supranational entity that could carry out those
demands doesn't exist and isn't gonna do those things.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #123 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 19:20

    
An origin of cyberpunk in the work of Bruce Springsteen, via William
Gibson:

"I knew that cyberspace was exciting, but none of the people I knew
who were actually involved in the nascent digital industry were
exciting. I wondered what it would be like if they were exciting,
stylish, and sexy. I found the answer not so much in punk rock as in
Bruce Springsteen, in particular Darkness on the Edge of Town, which
was the album Springsteen wrote as a response to punk—a very noir, very
American, very literary album. And I thought, What if the protagonist
of Darkness on the Edge of Town was a computer hacker? What if he’s
still got Springsteen’s character’s emotionality and utterly beat-down
hopelessness, this very American hopelessness? And what if the
mechanic, who’s out there with him, lost in this empty nightmare of
America, is actually, like, a robot or a brain in a bottle that
nevertheless has the same manifest emotionality? I had the feeling,
then, that I was actually crossing some wires of the main circuit board
of popular culture and that nobody had ever crossed them this way
before."

http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/6089/the-art-of-fiction-no-211-willia
m-gibson
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #124 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 12 19:22

    
Lives on the line where dreams are found and lost,
I'll be there on time and I'll pay the cost,
For wanting things that can only be found
In the darkness on the edge of town.

~ Bruce Springsteen, "Darkness on the Edge of Town"
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #125 of 240: Julian Bond (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 10:12

    
From Julian Bond, via Google Plus:

Re "Darkness on the edge of town". That image and also one by Joni
Mitchell "A prisoner of the white lines on the freeway" have resonated
with me in the past as metaphors for Western and particularly USA
society. You're free and there is freedom just as long as you stay
between the white lines on the freeway. They represent the boundaries
of acceptable behaviour and the big stick of law enforcement. Cross
those white lines and you are straying into the country of anarchy
where be monsters. Similarly with the Town. Everything is safe and
ordered under the street lights. Literally civilised as civilians live
their lives of civic duty and civic responsibility. The social contract
is at it's most pervasive within the civic community. But it only
stretches as far as the street lights. Beyond in the darkness, it's
every person for themselves.

So then we look at a picture of the globe at night. What's out there
in the dark spaces where the enlightenment has not yet reached?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #126 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 11:00

    
Drone wars:
http://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2011/08/10/obama-2011-strikes/

(Thanks to @gregoryfoster for tweeting that link.)

This is something you didn't see on television ("you can't handle the
truth!"). Covert and subtle war drones on; note the collateral damage.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #127 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 12 11:50

    
That Gibson interview in Paris Review is about as good as Gibson
interviews get.

http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/6089/the-art-of-fiction-no-211-willia
m-gibson
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #128 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 12 11:51

    

"So then we look at a picture of the globe at night. What's out there
in the dark spaces where the enlightenment has not yet reached?"

I'm inclined to think that the "dark spaces" are the ones where the
enlightenment is in full retreat.  Chernobyl and Fukushima, for two.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #129 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 11:59

    
Venessa Miemis writes very good "back to square one, let's rethink the
world" posts. Latest is here:
http://emergentbydesign.com/2012/01/10/core-principles-for-the-new-economy-hum
an-agency-enlightened-self-interest/

"I believe in a social and economic future that is convivial, vibrant,
thriving, and life-enhancing for all. We live with passion, manifest
our dreams, and don’t cause suffering to others in the process. We
engage in a process of continuous learning and mutual improvement. We
have fun playing infinite games while still getting shit done. We are
alive."

That quote makes me think of Jean Russell's work around
"thrivability": http://thrivable.net/ Jean is @nurturegirl - and she
really is a nurturing presence.

It's hard to think about thriving when you're hanging on by the skin
of your teeth, though. The average global citizen doesn't thrive,
doesn't feel safe, doesn't have a lot of enthusiasm about the present
or future. It's a depression, after all. You have to admire somebody
who has starch for a stiff upper lip in wicked times.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #130 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 12 12:03

    
http://www.slate.com/blogs/future_tense/2012/01/11/phobos_grunt_the_u_s_didn_t
_shoot_down_russia_s_mars_probe_but_it_could_have_.html

*So, the "Phobos-Grunt" Russian Mars probe came to a bad end, and here
Vladimir Popovkin, the head of Russia's space agency, hints that it
was done in through spacewar foul play.

*I'm guessing this is "Predator Shuttle" paranoia.  When you've got a
"hidden" gun bulging in your sleeve, and you're icing people right and
left while pretending nothing happened, people get itchy.

*I guess Popovkin's glad they didn't drag the probe out of orbit and
stash it ten years in Guantanamo.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #131 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 12 12:11

    
Speaking of which, I sure wish I could interview the Mossad guy who
designs and builds magnetic limpet mines for Iranian nuclear
scientists.  What a career this dude must have.

When the results of his labors hit Google News -- "men on motorcycles
blow nuclear scientist and unnamed companion to bits" -- what's his
personal reaction, I wonder?  I'm guessing it's something like, "hey
sucker, my personal assassination bomb trumps your city-wrecking bomb!"
Yet he must be aware that this vastly expands the legitimacy of
terrorist bombs as state-sponsored weapons.  

IEDs have been popular for ten years now.  Drones are IEDs with
cellphones and wings. These magnet bombs are IEDS with magnets and
motorcycles.  If they're good enough for the holy men of Al Qaeda,
they're good enough for Big Satan and Little Satan.

Maybe our bomb designer is an open-source guy who's way into
"bottom-up innovation."  They probably call him in to defuse bombs on
the days he's not building 'em.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #132 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 13:32

    
I see your motorcycle magnet bomb, and raise you this headline:
"Google predicts flu, fountain spews germs, boy blows up silo..." 
http://yourlife.usatoday.com/health/healthyperspective/post/2012-01-11/google-
flu-stress-norms-elder-abuse-waterfall-legionnaires-disease-cancer-boy-blows-u
p-building-/600908/1

Actually a set of unrelated stories, though they all have a connection
to health. You have to appreciate a kid whose one wish is to blow up a
grain silo. ""I watch MythBusters and they inspired me to blow a
building up." Indeed.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #133 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 15:52

    
I did read that Charlie Stross piece today, though not all the
hundreds of comments that followed, despite the fact that so many of
them looked interesting at a glance. There's always too much good stuff
to read and digest; if we have attention deficits, it's because there
are so many roadside attractions, all seductive.

Stross was talking about the state of the future; I think in this
conversation we've been staying closer to the present, which is weird
enough to keep us busy. The present is where we are, after all; the
future is completely unreal. We want to imagine a future that's
different, and of course it will be to one or another extent, but
seldom in ways we can predict. We keep predicting because we're bored
with the present, we want the future to hurry up, dammit, and bring us
something new.

I have an abiding interest in the UFO mythos, that sense of longing
people have as they watch the skies and hope to see something truly
different and startling. We never imagine that aliens will be boring. I
say never, but George Alec Effinger once wrote a short story wherein
aliens land on earth and prove to be boors with bad taste, a fondness
for leisure suits and terrible art. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #134 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 11 Jan 12 16:19

    
Whole 'nother meaning to "Smart Mob", Mafia now Italy's #1 bank:

http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/01/10/us-italy-mafia-idUSTRE8091YX20120110

  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #135 of 240: Julie Sherman (julieswn) Wed 11 Jan 12 20:10

    <scribbled by jonl Wed 11 Jan 12 20:12>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #136 of 240: George Mokray (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 12 20:13

    
Via email from George Mokray:

The Occupy sites could become models for resilient refugee camps,
self-sufficient for energy and efficient in waste recycling for use. 
After all, they were/are/will be  "voluntary" economic refugee camps. 
Could they become models for the emergency and disaster facilities we
regularly need (and a new line of camping equipment for those that can
afford it)?

I can see a lot of things that they could do with simple solar. 
Occupy Wall Street with a Solar Civil Defense?  But then I've believed
for a long time that Solar IS Civil Defense and a logical first step to
the renewable transition.  An added advantage to such small scale
solar is that the flashlight, radio, cell phone, and extra set of
batteries we are all supposed to have on hand in case of emergency is
the entry level for the billion + people in the world who do not now
have access to electricity.

When I visited NYC on October 21, 2011, the kitchen had a gray water
treatment system.  Soon after, there were pedal power generators and
solar panels there and at other Occupations.   The Wall Street compost
was biked to local community gardens, too, before the police evicted
them.  In Boston, a local portable house builder, MIT, and other
college and university students, and the local Maker community were
involved in planning winterization for Dewey Square.  Occupy Boston
began on the same weekend that a national housing rights conference,
Right to the City, came in town.  The Occupiers later took part in
local housing action in Malden and other cities and neighborhoods. 
Many other Occupations did and are doing the same, preventing eviction
and foreclosure for individual families.  Occupy Detroit is occupying
an abandoned neighborhood.  Combine that with solar and weatherization
barnraisings and you might have a grassroots local movement towards
energy efficiency.  (Does Van Jones know about this?)

In Boston, the General Assembly is still meeting.  National GAs have
happened as well.  Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Yemen, Syria, Spain, Greece,
the UK, and other countries are very much still unsettled.  It isn't
over.  This Spring is going to be a Global Spring.  Some of it may be
highly imaginative guerrilla gardening.  Some of it will be bullets and
prison.

Occupy and other such mass movements are not only political.  They are
social and civic as well, direct action rather than representative
action, as in voting.  So far, they have also been outside of party
structures as well, at least in the USA.  For me, it seemed as if there
were no means of public expression so people went into the street to
make something happen.  In Wall Street, it took some time before the
regular lines of mass communication could no longer ignore them. 
Occupy is people doing it for themselves, talking with each other.  It
is not about governing or even choosing the next Governor.

Occupy could be about broad policy, if people really wanted to pay
attention.  Occupy DC released an economic reform paper a couple of
months ago, Glass Steagle and all.  How many people have looked at it? 
Which other local Occupy's have done similar work on other topics?

Occupy is public and civic conversations, talking loud at the bus
stops, which is how Lech Walesa said Solidarity started.  They are more
than political and are not focused on electoral politics and
candidates, something which may be a loose commonality with all the
global protests.

At least, not yet.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #137 of 240: goatknockin (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 12 05:52

    
Via email from "goatknockin":

re: #91

" People are always gonna say, "surely this is Weimar Germany again,
all hope is lost" but here's somebody else saying, "this is 1977 again,
there is NO FUTURE. Again."

http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/jan/07/punk-fashion-sex-pistols

*Except it's a "no future" for posh rich people this time.  Posh
punk."

From 'The Psychic Soviet' (a collection of quasi-Marxist satirical
essays about rock music):

"While the punk phenomena echoed developments in bourgeois
marketeering through grass roots distribution campaigns such as Amway,
it was never paradigmatic in the way that its progenitors hoped.
Instead, its aesthetic triumph was felt in the liberalization of
violent and sexual content and the institutionalized disregard for the
integrity of the artist/worker.

... Punk, which explicated an apocalyptic nihilism ("No Future"), was
the corporate response to newly poignant environmental concerns spurred
by Three Mile Island, Love Canal, and so on. It was capitalism without
the pretense of social conscience -- the ruling class's proxy
mouthpiece for voicing a virulent hatred of its subjects ... in fact
the mirror of the bourgeois' uncensored bitching in the boardrooms and
private yachts about their upstart Seventies peons (environmental and
consumer groups)."

I sense a, uh, synchronicity...

-- G.K.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #138 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 12 06:55

    
Stewart Brand once wrote in _Coevolution Quarterly_ that punks,
however fierce they might appear, were in practice gentler and more
nuanced than hippies. I suppose apocalyptic nihilism is more sensible
and real than flower power. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #139 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 07:13

    
*Globalized peacekeepers unwittingly convey Nepalese-Haitian cholera.

http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/scientists-soldiers-brought-deadly-superbug-amer
icas/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #140 of 240: From Kenny Mann (captward) Thu 12 Jan 12 07:15

    
Kenny Mann, via e-mail:


Jon and Bruce,

How 'bout some creatively atemporal perspective on the stakes in that
headline poker game?

How we've seen such things settle down (or not) when seen before?
Expect to see hence?

...since we're clearly still around to talk about it.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #141 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 07:37

    
People don't go into Occupy camps so as to live in tents; they go
there to annoy and harass one-percenters.  Pursuing a tent-based
lifestyle is not some brand-new design problem.

It's pretty common for people who run refugee camps to find the
inhabitants getting radically politicized.  Not because camps are bad,
but because they're better than what they had.

Commonly, refugees are poor people already on the precarious margins
of society, and as soon as they're in a place, however humble, that's
built for themselves rather than the profit of slumlords, they suddenly
realize that they're poor because they're immiserated by the system. 
It's not because they lack solar panels.

Nobody builds favelas because they don't know how to build any better.
 They do know better, and they can even afford better, but not under
the legal and financial structures that breed favelas.  

The same goes for Occupy camps; nobody's gonna occupy abandoned towns
in North Dakota, because there's no way to get on TV there.  Camps and
slums are epiphenomena.  They're not utopian startups in the dewy
freshness of a New World.

This dead Texan guy here, Fred Cuny, was like "Mr Designed Refugee
Camp."  Great material for a novel.  It's never just about hammering up
shelters Jimmy Carter style and walking away.

http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/cuny/bio/hero.html
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #142 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 08:19

    

There's something intriguing about living in a society where rich guys
are Posh Punks who really do feel that they have No Future.   
Especially when they behave that loudly obnoxious punk way: spitting on
the middle-class, stage-diving into SuperPACs...  Making life up as
they go along, with crazy, "go rogue," do it yourself, tea-party
politics, where there used to be George Bush "prudence."

The idea of Gingrich running a useless attack campaign sponsored by a
wacky zillionaire, just so he can put the boot into the Mormon
business-vulture, out of sheer spite...  That has a rather Sid Vicious,
careening, out-of-control feel about it.  Personally, I don't think
Gingrich has the guts, but he's done weirder, nastier stuff in the
past.

Normally, rich guys are very Great-and-the-Good in their attitudes,
even in private.  If you go to Davos, you find that they're
well-briefed,  extravagantly polite to everyone, and extensively
concerned with do-gooder issues like river blindness and child
vaccination.  That's because they're mostly Type-A executive dudes who
figure that they can create rational plans and have them successfully
carried out.  So they behave in a way that accommodates those ambitions
and legitimizes their long-term aims.

In the Crisis, though, the rich tend to drift toward a bling-bling
Russian Mogul version of wealth, which is all about flinging your
elbows into the faces of the help.  Also, attacking one another in a
frenzy of open looting, often lethally.  

Here's an old WIRED article I wrote about the Russian "War of
Compromats," back in  the day.  Once you sell off the mass media to the
moguls, this SuperPac character-assassination stuff becomes
exceedingly likely. Moguls aren't responsible conservatives, they don't
circle the gilded wagons and tell the masses that it's about liberty
and justice for all. Instead, they know that their precarious lives
hang by a thread, so they're very "Like No Tomorrow."

 http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/6.01/sterling_pr.html

The Russian semibankyrschina age ended in a strange kind of Spy
Bonapartism,which we still have with us today.  I'm guessing a regime
of Punk No-Future Rich would be vulnerable to the same modern driving
forces.   When you've got a free-market state so hollowed out that
there's nothing left but spies, prisons and the military, you're gonna
end up ruled by some tough-guy spy prison-camp general.  And he might
even get the votes, because the 99% like and admire him a lot more than
they like you.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #143 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 08:21

    

It's always a revealing question, how any society thinks its
ultra-rich people are "supposed to behave."  What behavior by an
ultra-rich person  can successfully avoid envy, hatred and a scolding
from the general populace?  Statistically speaking, there are always
gonna be at least a few ultra-rich people around.  They're a social
reality, they're a demographic.  They don't often dominate as harshly
as they do now, but they're always around.

What are they supposed to do with themselves?  There are lots of
guidebooks about how to get rich, but very few about how to be rich. 
If we didn't have today's "Posh Punk" rich guys, what kind of rich guys
would we really want to have around? 

I was never much thrilled by even the older, 1990s, Davos
charity-entrepreneur style of rich guy.  They weren't cruel or crazy,
but they gave me the feeling that they had something  wrong with them.
Sone neurosis, really.  Like, if they were ever alone on a desert
island, with no one watching their stock prices, then they'd scratch
their own skins till they bled.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #144 of 240: From Walt Dangerfield (captward) Thu 12 Jan 12 10:09

    
Walt Dangerfield via e-mail:

"Like, if they were ever alone on a desert island, with no one
watching their stock prices, then they'd scratch their own skins till
they bled."

This is pretty much the view of economics duo Bichler & Nitzan who
argue that all capital today is financial in nature, and that all
finance is measured through differential rates of accumulation. The
only profit that matters is beating the average profits of everyone
else.

<http://dissidentvoice.org/2011/12/differential-accumulation/>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #145 of 240: from Walt Dangerfield (captward) Thu 12 Jan 12 10:09

    
And again:

This dead media is starting to turn ripe:

<http://publiceditor.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/01/12/should-the-times-be-a-truth-v
igilante/>

I noticed locally that the roadkill on the highway isn't getting
picked up either.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #146 of 240: From Julian Bond (captward) Thu 12 Jan 12 12:24

    
E-mail from Julian Bond:


I'm curious if Bruce has seen anything particularly interesting in the
arts and music this time around. Last year we had Anthropophagic
Syncretism which turned out to be a Hipster Chanteuse transplanted
from Sao Paulo to Hoxditch[1]. Anything comparable floating around in
2012?

How about Lana Del Rey, apparently famous for being manufactured
rather than famous despite of it. "Think about this for a second, how
can someone's public image be that their public image is fake. Such an
idea is so post-modern, so a product of internet culture, that it needs
severe unpacking."
<http://mthrfnkr.com/post/15135866637/i-be-that-pretty-motherfucker-harlems-wha
t-im>

Two things that have amazed me in late 2011. First AKB48. This seemed
like something straight out of Zeitgeist with Yasushi Akimoto taking
the role of Leggy Starlitz but done in a typically Japanese fashion. A
completely manufactured group consisting of 3 teams of 16 with an
apprentice team of 10 or so. And all performing Japanese pop bubble
gum nightly and competitively around Tokyo. As if that wasn't enough
there are variations on the same idea from the same source SKE48, SDN48
and NMB48 It's #23 who is replaceable, not "The American One".

The second was comparatively staid people in the business world of
computing admitting to being fans of Trance and Dubstep. Mostly that's
just another few generations growing up but still having a strong
taste for the music they listened to when they were 21. But look closer
and you find that they are actually listening to a commercialised,
decadent form of that music. So when they say Dubstep, they mean the
stadium super-club version from Skrillex, not the grimy, south london
club night version from Kode9 or Loefah. What's amazing is how fast
this happens and how fast a new music can go from being impossibly hip
to mainstream to decadence. You could argue that House took 15 years,
Drum and Bass 10 years, Dubstep 5 years and now it looks like
Post-Dubstep (James Blake, XX, etc) managed this in under 12 months.

[1]Hoxditch. Hoxton and Shoreditch are the deeply ironic and self
deprecating hipster centres of London.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #147 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 12 Jan 12 13:29

    
Are the artists themselves responsible for the faster move to the
decadent form?  Perhaps there is less viable social pressure against
selling out by allowing bad versions of your own work to go forth? 
Interesting observation.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #148 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 14:23

    
Well, the Anthropophage of Hoxditch is still in the music biz and
Tweeting her tousled head off.


cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

>< <> ^ <3 instagr.am/p/ga3Pm/
15 hours ago -




AnonyOps Anonymous

I'd love to see a blackout of all social media sites, search engines,
tech news, etc... on #J18 (January 18th).
18 hours ago -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



bigred1369 Sunshine megatron

I will not tweet update facebook or @foursquare on january 18 #J18
from 8a-8p #sopa @YourAnonNews #FBGB
15 hours ago -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



YourAnonNews Anonymous

You can show your protest of #SOPA by changing your avatar:
blackoutsopa.org | #SOPAblackout #J18
15 hours ago -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

@Pegasus_Warning HoT HoT HoT avatar!
10 Jan -




adferrera Ad Ferrera

"O prefeito da maior cidade brasileira está com os bens bloqueados na
Justiça por suspeita de fraude de milhões no programa 'Controlar'..."
10 Jan -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!
@
@Cesar_myOpinion fecha o olho , abre a orelha e vai!!!
9 Jan -




Cesar_myOpinion Caio César Mancin

Na lista das 50+ do iPhone, recordista d posições é a lindona
@cibellecibelle, ocupando 6 posições com as músicas da Sonja
Khalecallon!!!
9 Jan -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



EikeBatistta Eike Batista

To pensando em comprar os direitos autorais da gravadora do Michel
Teló e acabar com essa porcariada.
8 Jan -
Retweeted by cibellecibelle



cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!
@
@GabyAmarantos @iararenno que tudoooooooo!!!!!!!!!! Até quando cê
fica??
9 Jan -




cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

Loka instagr.am/p/fYaxX/
8 Jan -




cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

A.B.R.A. Pré-Ca CHEGOU e é HOJE! APENAS O COMEÇO! traz serpentina!
confetti! fantasia! fb.me/L1Kra78z
7 Jan -




cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

No baile do A.B.R.A. Pré-Cá amanha quero ver todo mudo de confetti e
serpentina na mão pulando a fantasia!!
6 Jan -




cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

Tia! #nofilter #nolayer instagr.am/p/eaQ_K/
4 Jan -




cibellecibelle Cibelle, La Sonja K!

real brazilian music , 100 % sao paulo produce fb.me/1etVUovR7
4 Jan ...
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #149 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 12 14:31

    
http://blissout.blogspot.com/2011/12/11-for-11-metronomy-english-riviera.html

*That's music critic Simon Reynolds doting over the with-it
obscurities that a guru of his ilk would be into these days.

*I'd have to admit that "the most interesting thing in music" that I
saw last year was Simon Reynold's book "Retromania," which explains in 
detail why music isn't as interesting as it used to be; or rather,
that it's interesting in different ways.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #150 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 12 15:50

    
I experience music every day, but I don't listen to it the way I did
in, say, 1970. I don't have that focus, it's background music, like I'm
in my own movie. The music I hear in passing is diverse and pretty
inconsistent. Fragmented. Top 40's all hip-hop (some of it very good),
the local public radio station has drifted into pop and "adult AOR" for
much of its airtime, with forays into Brazilian music, more general
world music, and odd eclectics. There's oldies radio, alternate rock
radio, the local cooperative radio station, probably a country station
here in Austin, though I wouldn't know where to find it.  I'm fond of
Soma FM, especially Suburbs of Goa, but I'm never sure what I'm
listening to there.  I run Spotify from time to time, and I"ve picked
up on oddly diverse playlists set up by friends here and there. 
Haven't listened to the blues much lately.  I've acquired music by fab
guitar virtuoso Gary Lucas, the Gourds, Blitzen Trapper, TV on the
Radio, the ever imaginative Wilco, Tinariwen, The Black Keys, Bon Iver,
PJ Harvey, M83, Wild Flag, Lady Gaga, Fleet Foxes, etc. - point being
that I'm all over the map.  I also listen to jazz, especially Miles
Davis, Freddie Hubbard, and the Dirty Dozen Brass Band. Like Bruce, I'm
a Cibelle fan. I hear all this through a haze of tinnitus that was
probably caused by years of too-loud concerts, especially The
Pretenders on their first tour: the late James Honeyman-Scott ripped my
eardrums to shreds.  I'm convinced that music shapes emotions,
thoughts, experiences.  I wanted to be a rock critic; the first review
I sent to Rolling Stone was rejected (by <captward>, in fact), and for
some reason I didn't follow up. I don't write about music much these
days, or film… I write about digital media somewhat, but more about
culture and politics, which are probably less interesting than the
latest Skrillex dubstep.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #151 of 240: From Kenny Mann (captward) Fri 13 Jan 12 02:20

    
E-mail from Kenny Mann:


====================================================================
"I still believed in my heart that some old guys would take the stage
in one of these clubs, with some grumbling or just a lot of bar
business — clanking glassware and dopey frivolities — followed by
sounds from the stage that would lull the patrons into a kind of dumb
selflessness, before the musicians transported us to a place where we
no longer knew or cared who we were when we came in or no longer had to
care about where we were going; as if what we brought with us no
longer existed.

"These guys would have been biding their time somewhere out of sight,
since 1953; working on a plan for the night that I just happened to
drop in on. They would steal back what had been stolen by whatever made
history take a wrong turn. It would save everything we have all been
unconsciously guarding and hoarding, just as these musicians had, bit
by bit, week in and week out, in the meantime, all along. These
musicians would have swept away all the substitute music that had been
foisted on us in a cynical attempt to make us believe that's what the
music had been and always would be. That substitute music would all be
forgotten, and all that was meant to be would finally have been
revealed."
====================================================================
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #152 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 13 Jan 12 05:51

    
This is what World War III looks like:

http://www.washingtonpost.com/business/industries/angry-crowd-pelts-beijing-ap
ple-store-with-eggs-after-release-of-new-iphone-4s-delayed/2012/01/12/gIQAlMVt
uP_story.html?tid=pm_pop

"Angry customers and gangs of scalpers threw eggs at Apple Inc.’s
Beijing store Friday after the iPhone 4S launch there was canceled due
to concerns over the crowd’s size."

...

"Hundreds of customers including migrant workers hired by scalpers in
teams of 20 to 30 waited overnight in freezing weather at the Apple
store in a shopping mall in Beijing’s east side Sanlitun district."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #153 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 12 06:32

    
"These guys would have been biding their time somewhere out of sight,
since 1953"

*Yeah man, the good old days, like Boris Vian reviewing the first
album by Serge Gainsbourgh.  Now that's a "record review."  It's really
a pleasure to me to read this, even in a rather ham-fisted translation
of Parisian jazz lingo.

http://tamtambooks-tosh.blogspot.com/2012/01/boris-vians-review-of-serge-gains
bourgs.html

Today, even if you're as hip a muso-figure as Boris Vian, it's very
hard to write a "record review" with this vivacity -- because you lack
the milieu of readers that was directly generated by Parisian record
stores.  You can see that this hectic essay, while it praised
Gainsbourg a bit, is a kind of priestly exhortation to the choir to run
over to the record store and drop some money in the collection plate
so as to preserve a certain French spiritual scene.

When that economic basis went, the scene went as well.  The modes of
musical production and distribution are radically different now.  Music
writing is quite different too.  Gainsbourg was probably ecstatic when
he read this Vian review -- and I have little doubt that he read it
immediately -- not just because it says nice things about him, but
because of things it was doing for him: boosting his sales and granting
him scene credibility.

We can still read the words now, but the society is gone; Vian's
exhortation can't perform the same functions. 

Other functions are performed today in our network-society milieu of
retromania, but their alienness is underestimated.   We think that
because we read the words on a screen, and hear the music as a file,
it's still somehow the same words and music as it was on paper and
vinyl.  But it isn't.

It's sweet to think that music is so powerful that it could restore
that missing modes of the past, of music-as-another-mode-of-being.  But
music is so cheap, fluid and omnipresent now that it's become an app,
a feature. It's not the weighty old analog music, any more than this
Well discussion is a Left Bank Parisian cafe' discussion.

People still listen to Serge Gainsbourg -- there was a recent, pretty
good biopic movie about him, and his critical reputation seems to be on
a distinct upswing; his manipulative sleazebag cynicism seems to mesh
with the tenor of our own times.  

But Serge's much-gifted daughter, Charlotte Gainsbourg, doesn't earn
her living selling plasticware in Paris record shops.  Charlotte is
much more the modern "multimedia multiartist," a multilingual
multinational actress-singer-socialite-celebrity.  Serge was one of
them, but Charlotte is one of us.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #154 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 12 06:38

    
*I forgot that I wrote this thing this year.  This essay for FRIEZE
makes some of the points I was just trying to make, but in a more
rhetorically elegant fashion.

http://www.frieze.com/issue/article/twenty-years-fore-aft/

*I'm kinda pleased with the way that one turned out; I was pretty much
firing on all my futurist cylinders.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #155 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 12 10:42

    
*A pair of interesting articles on the demolition of the middle class.
  You can either jump or get pushed, but there's no longer a "there"
there.


http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/economics-blog/2012/jan/13/many-americans-2
012-worse

http://www.ribbonfarm.com/2011/12/08/acting-dead-trading-up-and-leaving-the-mi
ddle-class/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #156 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 13 Jan 12 15:12

    <scribbled by jonl Fri 13 Jan 12 15:13>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #157 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 13 Jan 12 15:14

    
From the article at that second link:

"Not acting dead involves a strategic spending pattern that marketers
are starting to call trading up: buying premium in some areas of your
life, while buying budget or entirely forgoing spending in other
areas. This pattern of conscious, discriminating consumption defines
the emerging replacement for  the middle class....it is a fragmented
social space, with each little island being defined by a specific
pattern of trading-up, and an associated lifestyle design script."

By this description, I've been "trading up" for a long time, and I
knew people who were doing it 30 years ago (Ernest Callenbach wrote a
book about similar behaviors, called _Living Poor with Style_).

Quite a few people I know and many more that I don't know, though I
see 'em regularly enough, could cut massive fat from their lifestyles
and still live pretty well. They consider themselves middle class, and
that's probably accurate - they're in the 99%, but still rich by any
number of measures. The new austerity ain't here yet, but the future
doesn't appear particularly affluent, so I suspect that those who learn
to "trade up" will be in less pain than those who don't a half decade
from now.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #158 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 12 20:04

    
*Sign of the times: Electronic Frontier Foundation spots menacing
drones on the electronic frontier.


Electronic Frontier Foundation Media Release

For Immediate Release: Tuesday, January 10, 2012

Contact:

Jennifer Lynch
 Staff Attorney
 Electronic Frontier Foundation
 jlynch@eff.org
 +1 415-436-9333 x136

Who Is Flying Unmanned Aircraft in the U.S.?

Government Withholds Information on Drone Flight
Authorizations

San Francisco - The Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
filed suit today against the U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT), demanding data on certifications and
authorizations the agency has issued for the operation of
unmanned aircraft, also known as drones.

Drones are designed to carry surveillance equipment –
including video cameras, infrared cameras and heat sensors,
and radar – that can allow for sophisticated and almost
constant surveillance.  They can also carry weapons.
Traditionally, drones have been used almost exclusively by
military and security organizations.  However, the U.S.
Customs and Border Protection uses drones inside the United
States to patrol the U.S. borders, and state and local law
enforcement are increasingly using unmanned aircraft for
investigations into things like cattle rustling, drug
dealing, and the search for missing persons.

Any drone flying over 400 feet needs a certification or
authorization from the Federal Aviation Administration,
part of the DOT.  But there is currently no information
available to the public about who specifically has obtained
these authorizations or for what purposes.  EFF filed a
Freedom of Information Act request in April of 2011 for
records of unmanned aircraft activities, but the DOT so far
has failed to provide the information.

"Drones give the government and other unmanned aircraft
operators a powerful new surveillance tool to gather
extensive and intrusive data on Americans' movements and
activities," said EFF Staff Attorney Jennifer Lynch.  "As
the government begins to make policy decisions about the
use of these aircraft, the public needs to know more about
how and why these drones are being used to surveil United
States citizens."

Dozens of companies and research organizations are working
to develop even more sophisticated drones, so their use is
poised for a dramatic expansion in the coming years.
Meanwhile, news reports indicate that the FAA is studying
ways to integrate more drones into the national airspace
because of increased demand from federal, state, and local
governments.  EFF's lawsuit asks for immediate response to
our FOIA request, including the release of data on any
certificates and authorizations issued for unmanned
aircraft flights, expired authorizations, and any
applications that have been denied.

"The use of drones in American airspace could dramatically
increase the physical tracking of citizens – tracking that
can reveal deeply personal details about our private
lives," said Lynch.  "We're asking the DOT to follow the
law and respond to our FOIA request so we can learn more
about who is flying the drones and why."

For the full complaint:
https://www.eff.org/sites/default/files/filenode/EFFDroneComplaint.pdf

For more on this case:
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/01/drones-are-watching-you

For this release:
https://www.eff.org/press/releases/who-flying-unmanned-aircraft-us

About EFF

The Electronic Frontier Foundation is the leading
organization protecting civil liberties in the digital
world. Founded in 1990, we defend free speech online, fight
illegal surveillance, promote the rights of digital
innovators, and work to ensure that the rights and freedoms
we enjoy are enhanced, rather than eroded, as our use of
technology grows. EFF is a member-supported organization.
Find out more at https://www.eff.org.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #159 of 240: From Kenny Mann (captward) Sat 14 Jan 12 03:18

    
Kenny Mann via e-mail:


"These guys would have been biding their time somewhere out of sight,
since 1953"

*Yeah man, the good old days, like Boris Vian reviewing the first
album by Serge Gainsbourgh.

It's just a reboot. The kids are alright, back at home, in the rest of
the story -- rocking -- while our hero is lost out there in K.C.,
checking his elaborate delusions on how it might have all gone wrong.
Which, of course, it did. Boris, Serge et al might have been to clubs
like that, slumming. Who hasn't?

Sometimes the noise slides over into being music, regardless of time
and place. Music is pretty unreasonable that way.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #160 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:14

    
*The Economist suggests that we'll soon have so many drones in the sky
that they'll have to have "deconfliction" anti-crash hardware
installed, so they don't bash into one another and tumble into the
civilian streets.

American drones will, naturally, be hovering in a cloud of American
lawsuits.

http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2012/01/civilian-drones
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #161 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:21

    
*Dematerialized technomad wanders the planet in nothing but high-end
sports gear.  Plus Apple internet and cell access, of course.

http://www.grist.org/list/2012-01-04-this-guy-only-owns-15-things


  1.    Arc’teryx Miura 30 backpack
   2.    NAU shirt
   3.    Mammut rain jacket
   4.    Arc’teryx tshirt
   5.    Patagonia running shorts
   6.    Quick Dry towel
   7.    NAU wool jacket
   8.    Toiletry kit
   9.    Smith sunglasses
   10.    Wallet  (((I wonder how many paper and plastic items he's
got in his wallet)))
   11.    MacBook Air
   12.    iPhone 3GS
   13.    NAU dress shirt
   14.    Patagonia jeans
   15.    Running shoes  (((where's the multitool?  What an amateur)))

*If you've got networked friends on the ground willing to supply you
your 15 things when you got off the plane, no reason you couldn't
wander the world in your pyjamas.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #162 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:30

    
Occupy the Sky with citizen drones:
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2012/01/occupy-drones/

"Having thoroughly figured out how to cover giant events from ground
level, they are now exploring ultra-cheap alternatives to the
hundreds-of-thousands-of-dollar news choppers used for aerial reporting
of big events like protest marches and police clashes. In the process,
the video bloggers are discovering both how far low-cost consumer
technology has come and how much farther it needs to go.

"Like the HD video cameras now included in the livestreamers’
cellphones, aerial surveillance drones have progressed from
ultra-expensive professional gear to impulse-buy items. What was once
in the Pentagon budget is now at Toys “R” Us – in a simple form, at
least."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #163 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:35

    
*This travel writer circled the earth in the clothes he was standing
up in, just to make a point for a vest manufacturer.

http://www.rtwblog.com/2011/01/best-of-the-no-baggage-challenge/

*The real point is about the power of just-in-time global
telecommunications; he just arranges things so that his crew is in
place wherever he goes.  That way he got to maximize the Internet
publicity.

*This year, when I mentioned my favorite pants on my blog, the pants
manufacturer started sending me free paramilitary pants for review. And
I duly wore them.  And reviewed them. 

*But that's not even the punchline; next March, they're supposed to
ship me a demolition crowbar.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #164 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:39

    
Imagine roaming the world with nothing but credit-cards, a ScottEVest,
police cargo pants, *and a re-purposed pet police drone.*  Maybe with
a lethal covert-strike capacity!

Man, you'd be hell on wheels. Angle it right, and you wouldn't even
need the wheels.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #165 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 12 06:49

    
Of course, if you're REALLY geeked-out circa 2012, you've got your own
Chaos Computer Club hacker satellite overhead instead of a mere covert
drone.

http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-16367042
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #166 of 240: From George Mokray via email (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 12 16:17

    
"People don't go into Occupy camps so as to live in tents; they go
there to annoy and harass one-percenters.  Pursuing a tent-based
lifestyle is not some brand-new design problem."

People didn't go into Occupy camps to build libraries either but they
did and such libraries became important foci of their communities.  So
much so, that they are continuing at least in NYC and Boston.

Small scale, personal scale solar is an affordable and off-the-shelf
available way to get just a little bit free from the dominant power. 
It is interesting to me as a practitioner of such solar for over 30
years that writers like James Howard Kunstler, Paulo Bacigalupi (in
Wind-Up Girl) and Will McIntosh (in Soft Apocalypse) have little or no
real idea of how these technologies are already in use.

If the Occupations could supply their own power renewably, feed
themselves and others, take care of ALL their waste issues without
relying on the dominant power,
that would be quite a statement and a real alternative to the dominant
power.

My backpack has solar LED lights on it to power my bike lights and
recharge a cell phone.  My rented bedroom in the center of Cambridge is
essentially off-grid with solar LED lights and a solar/dynamo radio I
had modified to charge AA batteries (the most widely used battery in
the world, from what I've read).  Both of these have been working fine
for over six years and cost, altogether, less than $300 dollars. 
Occupiers could do the same thing, at home or in their tents downtown. 
It would make it more pleasant for them and provide an example for
those who have the eyes to see.  Furthermore, it is continuing
something Occupiers have already begun.

Just one more option to play with.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #167 of 240: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 14 Jan 12 19:29

    
Hmm, or perhaps the occupiers could get some of this gear comped if
they promise to wear it while some of those TV-wielding drones are
watching.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #168 of 240: From Toby Scales (captward) Sun 15 Jan 12 00:51

    
Toby Scales, via e-mail:


Bruce/Jon,

I notice no one's asked about the alarming escalation in Iran the past
week-- what's the (real) story there? Is it just more chicken or will
the US actually be drawn into it and forced to act? 

If that's too near a timeframe for comfortable speculation, where do
you see this Arab Spring business in 10 years, vis-a-vis the
Ahmadinejad in the room?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #169 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 15 Jan 12 08:15

    
*Well, here's one interesting PART of the "real story" in Iran.  Dead
Iranians, killed by offshore Iranians, bribed by Israeli Mossad, posing
as CIA.

http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2012/01/13/false_flag

If American nuclear engineers were being bombed inside the USA because
somebody didn't like Three Mile Island (or whatever), that would
obviously be called "state-sponsored terrorism." So, this is what that
is, only nobody bluntly says that because it's not in anyone's
interests to dwell on the abyss of hypocrisy in the Westphalian system.

The "alarming escalation in Iran" is a 1950s-style nuclear weapons
development program, that's being countered by some good-old-fashioned
1970s-style Middle East terrorist cell activity.  

Because it's 2012 now, and major military powers have learned how to
use the guerrilla tactics of non-state actors.  These are the guys that
organized armies have to fight all the time now: Taliban, Al Qaeda,
Hezbollah... Zetas in Mexico, even... how could they NOT know how
terror strikes work?  They know it's vile and ungentlemanly, but it's
not like modern organized armies fight each other.

There's one way to tell 'em apart, though: states build neat expensive
 magnet-bombs that don't waste nearby civilians, while nonstates send
out some fanatic wearing a nail-vest who kills everyone nearby.  

It's an "enantiodromia" thing, maybe.  Back in the Reagan era, some
Texan congressman discovered that Afghanistan was the Soviet VietNam.
Afghan mujihadeen were capitalist VietCong guerrillas. You win the Cold
War by turning the silk-hatted one-percenters into the grass-roots
subversives.  In hindsight, we can all recall how splendidly that
worked out.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #170 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 15 Jan 12 08:27

    
When I read that Foreign Policy article, about Mossad guys posing as
Americans -- they probably ARE former Americans, or at least they spent
a lot of time there -- I immediately wondered how far we are from
"false flag drone strikes."

Imagine this headline: "So-and-so was hit from the air with an
apparent Predator missile.  No state-sponsored covert-action operation
has claimed responsibility."

Iran captured an American "RQ-170 Sentinel" a while ago, and was keen
to show that off to the Chinese copycats. The Iranians must be aware
that this would accelerate the spread of drone technology, but
presumably the Iranians want some drones themselves.  A great way to
close the Strait of Hormuz, drones.

If the Israelis were really getting wily, they'd buy fake-product
Chinese drones and use those themselves.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #171 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 15 Jan 12 08:51

    
Following this logic, I'd guess that the ten-year-future of "Arab
Spring" will be "state-sponsored Arab Springs."

Here's an interesting example: female rent-a-mobs in Central Asia who
pursue state opponents in the streets.  They're like phoney, micro Arab
Springs run by local godfathers and moguls.

http://iwpr.net/report-news/rent-mob-protests-central-asia

Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a religious faction in virulent
permanent opposition to a nation-state, so it's really not fashionable
to praise Hezbollah's political arrangements.  However, if you look at
the way Hezbollah actually runs daily affairs on their Lebanese turf,
Hezbollah's rather deft at it.  Everyday people under their aegis like
and admire Hezbollah.   

So if you're a big romantic about nongovernmental, network-y,
flat-heirarchy, Arab popular movements, then Hezbollah is a kind of
existence-proof for what an Arab-Spring-in-Power might be.

I don't expect good news, myself.  Because every popular Arab
rebellion since who-knows-when has eventually reprised the last reel of
"Lawrence of Arabia."  You know, that scene where the brave,
self-sacrificing, devoutly pious tribes in the Army of Mecca howl
murder at each other in a blacked-out parliament as the infrastructure
of Damascus collapses.  And the sympathetic British white guy with all
the high-tech?  He's haplessly yelling good sense at them as they go on
being themselves.

It's no good saying that because Arabs have cellphones now, they're
not that people any more.   The Americans haven't changed all that much
since 1914 either; the Americans are still way into
global-wars-to-end-wars.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #172 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 15 Jan 12 17:21

    
Iran's fantasy of the world may well collide with the world's fantasy
of Iran; I'd personally like to hang out with those folks, experience
their culture, forget the madness of power and celebrate the lives of
ordinary human beings. Check this out:
http://www.theatlantic.com/infocus/2012/01/a-view-inside-iran/100219/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #173 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 15 Jan 12 17:56

    
Re the Arab Spring: it's not hard to believe that your social media
conversations and your ability to instigate flash mobs the grow and
become somewhat organized and persistent is meaningful, relevant, and
somehow related to a concept called "democracy." Democracy may mean a
governance that's more participatory or a broader distribution of
power, both of which have seemed to emerge in the U.S. and other
developed nations. Real democracy is unlikely, I don't think we've ever
seen it. The Arab Spring could be squashed, and it could be
"successful" but create only more of the same, with different players.
I suppose it could produce something "better," but I'm not clear how
that improvement is defined. When there's a realization that resources
and power are scarce, those who have power move forcefully to take
whatever they can. Whether they can be challenged successfully by
crowds, even smart crowds, is debatable. (You can substitute "mobs" for
"crowds" if you'd like).
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #174 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 15 Jan 12 21:52

    
http://www.coalitionagainstgeoengineering.org/links

The "Coalition Against GeoEngineering" and their chemtrail pals.  A
nice harbinger of tomorrow's "afraid of the sky" contingent.

If carbon dioxide was a visible gas, these guys would be out of their
minds with panic already.  There must be somebody in the nexus of
irrationality who thinks that DRONES are spreading chemtrails.  Covert
drones plus chemtrails are a marriage made in  paranoia heaven.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #175 of 240: From George Mokray (captward) Mon 16 Jan 12 02:06

    
George Mokray via e-mail:

"Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a religious faction in virulent
permanent opposition to a nation-state..."

Hezbollah has built a telecom network, which they are trying to expand
- by force if necessary.  Does that make them a business as well?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #176 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Mon 16 Jan 12 04:37

    
Oh I spoke to a guy last year who was convinced that NATO are dumping
millions of tonnes of ALUMINUM OXIDE into the sky over the US.

That was the saner part of the conversation. Weirdest thing is he was
Canadian and I'm British so I don't really understand what was meant to
be at issue.

If he's the future it's not the sky I'm afraid of...
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #177 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 16 Jan 12 05:09

    
DARPA continues to be busy bees...drones for clones, clones for
drones?

http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/MTO/Programs/Hybrid_Insect_Micro_Electromechanic
al_Systems_%28HI-MEMS%29.aspx
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #178 of 240: Email from George Mokray (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 12 05:52

    
"Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a religious faction in virulent
permanent opposition to a nation-state..."

Hezbollah has built a telecom network, which they are trying to expand
- by force if necessary.  Does that make them a business as well?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #179 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 12 06:11

    
Chemtrails have a soundtrack... odd sounds recorded and reported from
various places around the world: http://strangesoundsinthesky.com/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #180 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 12 06:46

    
Here's a futurist outfit's Slideshare "trends for executive summary."

http://www.slideshare.net/jwtintelligence/jwt-10-trends-for-2012-executive-sum
mary

If you've never seen how contemporary trendspotting gets packaged for
the net these days, this is a nice cogent example.  Note how the
graphics make this look like a designer mood-board, and how the user
isn't troubled by any of the facts and figures of the firm's "desk
research" (which, frankly,  probably consisted mostly of websurfing).

People often complain about "futurist jargon."  Like, in this case,
"Objectifying Objects."  Come on, what could that possibly mean?  But,
when you're trying to get people to reperceive something -- "that's not
an oddity, that's a trend" -- it helps a whole lot to re-name it.  To
re-name it is to re-think it.

In the case of "objectified objects," you can check out this year's
design-hipster cult gizmo, the BERG "Little Printer."  This thing may
or may not become a commercial success, but it got tremendous mindshare
among the net designerati.

http://bergcloud.com/littleprinter/

This gizmo's basically as cheap and low-down as a thermal printer out
of a cash register. However, you can see it's been reconceptualized as
a means of giving physical form to a cloud of social media snippets. 
In other words, some fading thermal pic of my Facebook boyfriend, all
crumpled up in my purse, is "actually" part of a megatrend of
"objectified objects."  

And if I believe that, am I better off?  Well, yeah. I am. At least,
I'm probably better off than somebody who gets a BERG Little Printer as
a Christmas present.  Because then I just stare and think, "gee, this
really makes me feel out-of-it."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #181 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 12 07:00

    
<bruces> found this bit of street art, a shot of an "Authorized Drone
Strike Zone" in NYC:
https://twitter.com/#!/BaLueBolivar/status/158728329225179137/photo/1/large
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #182 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 12 07:03

    
Re<inkwell.vue.180>: that slide deck seems more of a review of
recent-past trends, than a view of the future. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #183 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 16 Jan 12 09:43

    
Weirdness is Free, on Triple Canapy...article re: Anonymous
http://canopycanopycanopy.com/15/our_weirdness_is_free

How do you both see hactivism playing out 30 years from now? Same
issues of freedom and open source and surreptitiously watching Big
Brother, or something new? Or do these issues finally get resolved?
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #184 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 12 10:31

    
Pilotless cargo drone delivers "Meals Ready to Eat."  Might be a
harbinger of little urban aircraft that deliver pizzas.

"Amazon Drone Delivery," maybe.  After all, drones are basically GSP
smartphones with wings.

http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2083673/Military-reveals-revolutionary
-pilotless-cargo-drone-deliver-supplies-territories-plagued-roadside-bombs.htm
l
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #185 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 12 10:36

    
Oh and, by the way, the "roadside bombs" these cargo drones are
avoiding are basically the poor-guys' Predators; they're remote-control
explosives without the wings.

This guerrilla ground-war versus global air-power thing has been going
on since the Vietnam days of Huey choppers versus punjee sticks. 
That's pretty interesting, but what's REALLY interesting is the
business of global punjee sticks versus guerrilla air drones.  9/11 was
all about guerrilla air power and the world hasn't been the same
since.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #186 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 16 Jan 12 11:06

    
Here's the stats on the drone being used by the green enviro Sea
Shepherds to embarrass whatever malefactors the Sea Shepherds are
interested in embarrassing.

"Sea Shepherd uses innovative direct-action tactics to investigate,
document, and take action when necessary to expose and confront illegal
activities on the high seas."

http://www.suasnews.com/2011/12/10803/the-sea-shepard-drone/

*So, if drones are being used by guys you agree with politically, then
drones must be great gizmos all-around.  I think this conclusion is
formally known as "confirmation bias."

*I got to inspect the Rainbow Warrior this year.  The brand-new
spanking high-tech Rainbow Warrior on her maiden cruise. No drones
aboard yet.  Matter of time, I reckon.

http://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/sets/72157628109640718/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #187 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 16 Jan 12 14:06

    
This makes me think of those dadaist punks in Kessel's _Good News from
Outer Space_. They broke into cars and installed new stereo systems.
We should see attack drones that explode overhead and spray a
substantial radius with caramel popcorn or images of Zooey Deschanel's
tuxedo-encrusted fingernails.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #188 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 17 Jan 12 06:15

    

*This NASA open-source software ought to be handy if you want to
parametrically generate some homemade drones.  Then you can fabricate
'em out of recycled plastic and unleash 'em on an unsuspecting
populace.

*The best part is that when the cops show up looking for your
"criminal drone lab," there isn't one.  It's all been outsourced to the
cloud and then crowdsourced to fab labs.

http://www.openvsp.org/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #189 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 17 Jan 12 06:35

    
Here's an article about Italy that's recommended by Alex Roe, the
commentator I was quoting earlier.  It begins with an abstract economic
argument about what Italy supposedly ought to do as a rational
nation-state in a global economic system, but as it rambles on, it
begins to describe how Italy actually exists.

Makes you wonder what will last longer: the phantoms of the global
financial elite or the shadows of the "extra-governmental entities." 
Nice map of a "mafia index" in the article here.  Interesting that
we've lived to a point where stuff like that gets a nifty info-viz
graphic.

The finance crisis isn't about "law and order" versus "crime," it's
about one entrenched system of extralegal corruption against another
entrenched system of extralegal corruption.  The Italian population is
about as likely to pay their taxes as the financiers are likely to pay
a Tobin Tax.

http://creditbubblebath.blogspot.com/2012/01/prospects-for-structural-reform-i
n.html
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #190 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 17 Jan 12 13:23

    
*Deepak Chopra waxing all perky and positive about the bright side of
mankind's great crises.  Gosh what terrible rubbish this is.

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/deepak-chopra/global-trends-optimism_b_1195330.h
tml
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #191 of 240: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Tue 17 Jan 12 17:57

    
I quit even trying to make sense of him.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #192 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 17 Jan 12 21:30

    
I've been thinking that some of the most interesting and contradictory
comments are about movements, crowds, mobs, gangs, armies, criminal
associations and the like, and that is is hard to look at trends in
group behavior without paying some attention to political histories and
political patterns.

Thanks be to Saint Synchronicity, I read something earlier today that
shed an interesting light on that concern.

    "Technology foresight has been stuck for the last 10-20 years; we
need to be paying more attention to social-cultural futurism."

http://www.openthefuture.com/2012/01/the_future_isnt_what_it_used_t_1.html

 What do you think?  How important are social patterns and shifts
versus technical innovations? 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #193 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 17 Jan 12 21:31

    
(Sorry, I should have clarified -- the most interesting and
contradictory comments in this conversation, not in general.)
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #194 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 17 Jan 12 22:05

    
I'm not sure exactly what Jamais means when he refers to
"social-cultural futurism," but "social" and "cultural" are both
prominent in my bag of thoughts. Those categories, though, are
practically too broad to be meaningful. 

Right now "social" is tied to marketing, via "social media," and
cultures intimately intertwingle with markets, fertilized with money:
"All currency is neurotic currency." (Norman O. Brown, who also said
"In its famous paradox, the equation of money and excrement,
psychoanalysis becomes the first science to state what common sense and
the poets have long known - that the essence of money is in its
absolute worthlessness."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #195 of 240: Rob Myers (robmyers) Wed 18 Jan 12 04:07

    
NASA's "open source" license isn't. The future is one in which more
and more people claim that more and more things that are less and less
open source are "open".
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #196 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 18 Jan 12 06:20

    
Bruce's new book of short stories, _Gothic High Tech_, has just been
released: http://amzn.to/ziMNot

"He roams our postmodern planet, from the polychrome tinsel of Los
Angeles to the chicken-fried cyberculture of Austin... From the
heretical Communist slums of gritty Belgrade to the Gothic industrial
castles of artsy Torino...always whipping that slider-bar between the
unthinkable and the unimaginable."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #197 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 18 Jan 12 08:39

    
http://www.openthefuture.com/2012/01/the_future_isnt_what_it_used_t_1.html

Yeah, that Cascio thing is super.   I loved that.  It's part of the
peril of looking at the aspects of futurity that are easiest to number
and study -- "searching for the keys under the streetlights."

Unfortunately what Jamais is describing there is the basic difference
between the sciences and the humanities.  It's part of the intellectual
legacy of futurism to describe history in terms of scientific advances
and market forces.  That's where futurism came from.

Once you drift from that field and start talking about futurity like
Italo Calvino did -- "The future's all about
'Lightness,''Quickness,''Exactitude,' 'Visibility,' 'Multiplicity,'
'Consistency' -- well, you can say some truly fascinating stuff, but
you're also getting very, uh, literary.  A lot of the issues Cascio
claims we're overlooking are issues that should have been properly
tackled by public-spirited, campaigning novelists.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #198 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 18 Jan 12 08:42

    
"NASA's "open source" license isn't. The future is one in which more
and more people claim that more and more things that are less and less
open source are "open"."

*Every piece of "open-source" anything is considered an act of fascist
oppression by somebody somewhere.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #199 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 18 Jan 12 10:00

    
I'm surprised at Jamais' list that "very few of us even came close to
imagining." I found nothing on that list surprising. Perhaps Jamais and
his futurist friend were blinded by science?

The "collapse of American hegemony" is just an aspect of the erosion
of the power of nation-states. The people who set out to bankrupt the
U.S. and weaken its government weren't shooting themselves in the foot.
They were aligned with more powerful and wealthy forces, and
acknowledging that those corporate powers didn't want to contribute to
entities that they don't own and control.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #200 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 18 Jan 12 11:06

    
It might be a bit generational, too, Jon. Us old folks were thinking
about the future before tech permeated our lives. My original
fascination with sci-fi and futurism was about how otherly different it
all was. It was informing me of tech that actually existed or was in
the near future; of which I was unaware. Jamais' and the younger
generation are immersed in it a bit differently, and you're right, it
may have resulted in some blind spots. Apparently he sees it now.
Bruce's point in #197 is well-taken. Talking about the "whole
enchilada" is speculation at best. I barely grasp the currents of the
'humanities', wouldn't know how to extrapolate them into future
scenarios. Back to Bruce's original statement about knowing what the
"drivers" are.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #201 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 18 Jan 12 12:10

    
I'm thinking trendspotting isn't the same as prediction, and neither
is necessarily "futurism," which is actually a pretty useless term,
when you think about it. 

Some of us who were forward-thinking or future-focused in the 60s,
70s, and 80s found, in the 90s, that the future was right in front of
us. And with a few years' experience, we could see that essentials
changed less than we thought they would, though technology was evolving
like crazy.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #202 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 18 Jan 12 15:22

    
I should mention that we're almost done - tomorrow's the final day of
the State of the World conversation. We should think of Profound Things
to summarize our conversation.

I was reading an very striking interview today with scientist Bernardo
Kastrup:
http://www.skeptiko.com/bernardo-kastrup-consciousness-research/  It
hit home with me because of my interest in states of consciousness,
what it means to be aware, etc. How conscious are we, what are the
states of consciousness, what does it mean to be unconscious? He
relates it all to memory.

An excerpt:

Therefore, if the brain’s impaired because you are asleep and you are
not in a dream state, or because you fainted, or you’re under
anesthesia, consciousness then disappears. But one cannot tell the
difference, of course, between the absence of an experience or the
absence of a memory of an experience. It is impossible for us
empirically, from a first-person perspective, to tell the difference.

"So the absence of consciousness, or the assumption that consciousness
may be absent, when we interfere with the brain in certain ways,
natural or unnatural, is considered an empirical reason to believe that
consciousness is generated by the brain.

"But it may be different. It may be that interference with the brain
interferes with memory formation; that consciousness perhaps was there
all along. Maybe you were in amazing dream worlds while you were
undergoing surgery under anesthesia. It’s known world-wide that, for
instance, teenagers play a very dangerous game called, 'The Fainting
Game,' in which they on purpose choke themselves to have a mystical
experience and hopefully return. That is something that is not
recommended for anyone to do.

"But all these things are suggestive that consciousness goes on during
periods in which we are assumed to be unconscious and the only thing
that gets impaired is the formation of the memory that gives you later
access to that experience."
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #203 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 18 Jan 12 15:27

    
*Jamais makes the interesting point that the technologies we consider
"futuristic" haven't changed much in years.  Of course they've advanced
at terrific rates, but we haven't seen an entirely new one lately.

Cascio speaks:

"Here's what I mean: if you were to grab a future-oriented text from
the early part of the last decade, you'd find discussions of
technological concepts that radical futurists and "hard science"
science fiction writers were seeing as being on the horizon,
developments like:

Molecular nanotechnology (((mmmph)))
Artificial intelligence and robots galore  (((drones galore, some Siri
stuff and searchware collective intelligence)))
3D printers (((big boom on the street)))
Augmented reality  (((I like it a lot, it's not a big business)))
Ultra-high speed mobile networks  (((Sorta)))
Synthetic biology  (((term covers multitude of sins)))
Life extension  (((old Tim Leary favorite)))
Space colonies  (((yeah yeah, sure sure)))


"I could go on, but you get the picture. All of those technologies
appeared in the "hard science" science fiction game series Transhuman
Space, which I worked on in 2001 to 2003. Most could easily be found in
various "what the future will look like" articles and books from the
late 1990s.  (((Robots 1920s, Sputnik 1950s)))

"Since then, some of those concepts have turned into reality, while
others remain on the horizon. But pin down a futurist today and ask
what technologies they expect to see over the next few decades, and
you'll get a remarkably similar list -- often an identical one...." 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #204 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 18 Jan 12 15:41

    

*People who think today's sci-fi writers should be politically active
might enjoy this set of essays.  Just look at 'em tearing their hair.

http://www.sfsignal.com/archives/2012/01/mind-meld-current-politics-in-sff/

*Of course, a discourse on political science fiction that doesn't
mention Newt Gingrich is like a cavalry parade that doesn't mention
machine guns.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #205 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Wed 18 Jan 12 17:03

    
Nothing profound, but as there has been this recent polarization of
the 99% of us and the 1% of them, I've had Howard Rheingold's phrase in
my head this whole conversation: "What it is, is up to us."

The burden is on the "us"...it's up to us, the semi-enlightened
technorati, to put the tools of our time to good use and create the
future(s) we want to see, rather than inherit the dregs of the 1%. And
that is going to have to be done within the context of the real world
reality Bruce spelled out at the very beginning. 

This has all been very sobering.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #206 of 240: fartron (julieswn) Wed 18 Jan 12 20:19

    
From Fartron:


"NASA's "open source" license isn't. The future is one in which more
and more people claim that more and more things that are less and less
open source are "open"."

*Every piece of "open-source" anything is considered an act of fascist
oppression by somebody somewhere."
"

It may be true that Stallman has been running around telling everyone
that the sky is falling for decades now, but I'm not convinced yet
that he's wrong.

Huge mainframes have returned under the doublespeak name "The Cloud."

Google no longer sees fit to return the most interesting and relevant
results to my searches, but instead sees its purpose as connecting me
with the most relevant salesman.

Over New Years an intoxicated and not particularly tech-savvy friend
expressed the issue to me by saying, "All I know is a few years ago I
had access to all the world's long hidden and secret information, and
in no more than 5 seconds. And today there's less of it and it takes
longer."

Most of the information technology developments of recent years have
been at the service of an increasingly centralized few.

So maybe Stallman wasn't a headless chicken but a breathless canary.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #207 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 19 Jan 12 06:26

    
I'm not so sure that we had access to "hidden and secret" information,
or that information that was available a few years ago is less
available today. There's a fog of marketing over the web, but fog
doesn't make things go away, it makes things less visible. Noise
doesn't make signal disappear, but makes it harder to pin down.

If you make your living as a content provider, there's huge pressure
to spew more and more content at higher rates and figure out ways to be
heard above the din. The dubious practice of SEO draws billions of
dollars per year from companies desperate to boost their search
visibility, all hoping to be in the first page of some search results,
as though that page could hold 'em all. Twitter is a firehose of often
useful, just as often trivial information. As David Weinberger says,
"everything is miscellaneous" and information strikes you in ever
random/uncategorized blasts. Through searches and tagging you can find
pretty much anything, the question is where and how to focus. We look
for guidance and find few truly authoritative voices.

More than ever, I think we need to get control of our heads and
understand the processes associated with attention. That last thing I
posted helped me understand that consciousness is memory, and working
on attention means cultivating memory with discipline and focus.

I don't know what this does to the "state of the world," I suspect it
can only be helpful.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #208 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 19 Jan 12 06:50

    
State of the physical world: the earth's crust is stretching, not just
along fault lines:
http://www.krqe.com/dpp/news/local/central/earths-crust-in-nm-is-stretching
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #209 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 19 Jan 12 06:54

    
Kodak files for chapter 11:
http://techland.time.com/2012/01/19/former-trailblazer-kodak-files-for-chapter
-11/?iid=tl-article-latest

The company didn't think to lobby to have digital photography
outlawed.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #210 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 09:26

    
You know, it was sadder than that.  Kodak was a pioneer of digital
photography, but Kodak didn't want to lower itself to make crappy
digital cameras that took lousy, grainy pictures.  It was Kodak's
dedication to quality that really did 'em in.  As engineers, having
reached a high-tech peak of performance, they couldn't cheapen
themselves and crawl down.

It's like watching an analog aristocracy done in by vulgar, jumped-up,
digital arrivistes.  You know that Kodak is the Gothic relic of a
vanished era, but there's still something painful and demeaning about
seeing them forced to sell off their patents like the family's
long-cherished silverware.

I get the same tremulous feeling from Yahoo and FlickR, nowadays.  I'm
still heaping photos in there, but the Instagram crowd is eating their
Web 2.0 lunch -- and FlickR didn't last any 130 years, either.  They
seem to be watching their Yahoo favela crumble with a sense of flaccid
resignation.  Probably they're all busy on Twitter.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #211 of 240: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 19 Jan 12 09:33

    
wrt to social-cultural forces: this, from an egyptian journo who was there
--- social capital, culture, boots on the ground mattered far more than FB
in the egyptian arab spring


http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2012/01/15/INKR1MKGSI.DTL
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #212 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 09:35

    
"Gothic High-Tech" and "Favela Chic."  The squalor of this transition
is gonna play out for quite a while -- at least a decade, I think. 
It's not just a one-year state-of-the-world thing.

"Gothic High-Tech" and "Favela Chic" have their virtues and their
upsides, but when they crash directly, like they just did in this SOPA
thing, they seem to be in a culture-war over who can become more
squalid.  The Gothic side is all about, "hey, let's bribe some
Congressman behind closed doors" and the Favela group is in firm global
solidarity with spammers, pirates and organized cybercrime.

The very LAST thing they're gonna do is have some kind of honest and
open debate about the central issues.  They don't know what honor is,
what fairness is, or what justice is, and in their pitifully deflated
marketplace world, there's nobody left who can tell 'em.

There's a philosophical comfort in futurism, in knowing this won't
last forever.  Because it won't, but boy is that situation ever 2012.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #213 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 09:36

    
How are you, @loris Paulina?  Long time no see.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #214 of 240: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 19 Jan 12 10:36

    
howdy back, bruce
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #215 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 19 Jan 12 12:06

    
And hello from me, as well!

Speaking of the future, here's an io9 piece that says big data
manipulation is "creating the science fiction future." Their #2,
"social networks already know who you know," made me wonder of the
author's jumping to conclusions. The idea that LinkedIn can tell who I
know is laughable to me - their "people you may know" list is
laughable. It's filled with people I barely know or don't know at all.
I don't think our technologies are as "smart" as we like to pretent. My
one experience with Siri via a friend's new iphone as a complete bust.
Siri was dumb as a post, couldn't answer any of my questions
accurately (because "she" made wrong inferences, and couldn't seem to
parse even careful human speech very well).
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #216 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 12:59

    
*Yves Behar geezer chic.  "Old people in big cities who are afraid of
the sky."  But with awesome design for their medications!

http://www.fastcodesign.com/1665857/5-innovation-lessons-from-a-breakthrough-b
rand-aimed-at-aging-americans#1
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #217 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Thu 19 Jan 12 14:01

    
Interesting piece on future scenarios for India; nice example of the
process:

http://ieet.org/index.php/IEET/more/Inayatullah20120114
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #218 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 14:47

    
*Here's a nice big piping heap of RAND futurist demographics.  The
takeaway: America has kids, China doesn't.  Nah nah nah.

*Even the poor, who used to have tons of kids, don't, unless they're
Moslem or Subsaharan.

http://www.rand.org/publications/randreview/issues/2011/winter/dusk-dawn.html

"In this article, we turn our focus to the demographic futures and
related economic prospects facing China, India, and the United States
over the next several decades. The trends in these countries reflect
just some of the shifts in power to which the world has already,
literally, given birth. How the countries respond will determine their
ultimate fates.  (((There are no "ultimate fates.")))

"China’s population is expected to peak at 1.4 billion in 2026 and to
decline thereafter, whereas India’s population will likely keep growing
through mid-century, surpassing China’s no later than 2025 and topping
1.65 billion in 2050, according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s
International Data Base (see Figure 1). More importantly, by 2035,
China’s population will skew heavily toward older age groups, while
India’s largest cohorts will still be in the age groups below 50. 
(((Hey India and China, let's you and him fight.)))

"Right now, as of 2012, China is entering an era in which its rapidly
aging population could constrain its economic growth. India, in
contrast, will enjoy a substantial demographic advantage until around
2030, when the ratio of working-age Indians to dependents will likely
be at its highest.

"Alone among the world’s large affluent nations, the United States
will see modest increases in its working-age population through 2050;
meanwhile, the working-age populations of Europe and Japan are
projected to fall steeply through 2050. These demographic and economic
trends alone may mean the United States will be the predominant global
power for at least the next half-century. If anything, the United
States could become even more dominant in the alliances it leads...." 
(((My guess is that if you're European and you look at those stats,
that's somehow not what you see.  My guess is that Europeans don't see
any dominant swaggering Yanks there, but a terrifying demographic wave
of Moslems immigrants.)))
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #219 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 19 Jan 12 17:22

    
*If you'd like to see this discussion end in a burst of contemporary
razzmatazz, you could check out 

#megaupload

on Twitter right now.  Megaupload a multinational file-sharing site
with an  alleged 150 million users whose founders and profiteers just
got arrested by US feds.  Millions of hackers just got deprived of
their customary cheap and easy access to movies and films.  For the
darkside crowd, a war in Iran would be minor news in comparison.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #220 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 19 Jan 12 21:43

    
We're good for one more day, we'll be holding forth here through
tomorrow, Friday, and we'll wrap Friday with a face to face - if you're
in Austin, catch us at Chuy's South (William Cannon and MOPAC) around
6pm Friday.

I'm watching a replay of the South Carolina Republican Debate, where
several candidates are coming down against SOPA. That's a wonder to
behold. (Rick Santorum says "the idea that anything goes on the
Internet - where does that come from?")

Joanna Macy has co-authored a book, due in March, called _Active
Hope_: "Most books addressing global issues focus on either our dire
problems or grand-scale solutions. Joanna Macy and Chris Johnstone
focus instead on equipping readers with a transformational mind-set.
Facing the facts of a planet and economies in crisis, many individuals
feel hopeless because they recognize that they can’t create their
desired outcomes. But rather than allowing this reality to shut us
down, we can choose active hope. This hope is something we do rather
than something we have. Instead of acting only when we deduce we may
succeed, we can focus on our intention and let that be our guide."
(http://www.newworldlibrary.com/BooksProducts/ProductDetails/tabid/64/SKU/19726
/Default.aspx)

What would a transformational mind-set look like, I wonder? Maybe we
start with beginner's mind: "If your mind is empty, it is always ready
for anything, it is open to everything. In the beginner's mind there
are many possibilities, but in the expert's mind there are few."
(Shunryu Suzuki)
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #221 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 19 Jan 12 22:14

    
Very interesting!  What does the beginner's mind do about all those
aging populations unable to pull their own weight?

In 1968 there was almost accidentally a huge international sense of
generation across cultures in North America, Europe, Japan and
elsewhere.  It was at first a music driven understanding of identity
and common cause, with an emerging outrage about war and other bad
practices.  Up against the wall!  For many reasons it was fleeting, but
it was strikingly unlike anything before, and parts of the expression
of revolt were disturbing to various governments. Maybe all
governments.

We have not seen a world wide wakeup call that is young, clear and
fearless.  Perhaps that will be left to countries with aging
populations. Perhaps their young have common cause with the young of
other countries and languages. Many different scenarios come to mind.  
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #222 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 20 Jan 12 05:25

    
Swapping is the New Buying. A small pebble in the pond.

http://www.good.is/post/at-this-vending-machine-swapping-is-the-new-buying/
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #223 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 20 Jan 12 06:53

    
"What does the beginner's mind do about all those aging populations
unable to pull their own weight?"

It approaches the question without preconceptions, I suppose.
Expectations conditioned by legacy thinking restrict creativity in
finding solutions.

I've engaged online with a couple of libertarian thinkers who feel
that social security payments should be abolished. When you ask what
should happen to those who felt that SS was their retirement plan and
have no other means of support, they don't really have an answer.
Similarly, there are those who are opposed to the provision of free
healthcare to those who can't afford it otherwise. The result would be
that the elite, those who have good jobs and a stash of money, would
surive, others would be on the streets or worse. It's their own damn
fault - they didn't accumulate wealth, have financial luck, or come
into the world with an already-well-established support system.

When we have elderly living and dying in the streets, I think there'll
be a backlash - I don't think we like to see that sort of thing. OTOH
we could do what the Germans did with the Jews, create concentration
camps and put those folks out of sight/out of mind. Or we could develop
programs of euthanasia.

A decade ago I would've said the U.S. would never go there, that we
have an inherent commitment to mutual support, that we would always
take care of each other and see that as part of the mission of
government. I would also have said that the John Birch Society sort of
libertarians would never be taken seriously or take any sort of power
in the U.S. I was evidently naive.

Globally we have large and growing populations and shrinking
availability of resources. Academics who've done the math have told me
that the world could never support a broad global extension of the U.S.
middle class standard of living, but more and more are demanding it,
hence the strain on resources. Those who are already rich and powerful
may be less apt to tolerate middle class consumption of resources that
doesn't challenge their wealth, but as it's increasingly obvious that
there's not enough pie to go around, some at the table may be lunging
for the pie and running with it. 

Sooner or later, the rest of the folks at the table notice this - they
wake up and give chase. One possible future is that civil Occupy
demonstrations give way to movements that are angry and done with
civility. Hope we don't see that happen. Smart monarchs know to give
the people enough that they don't get totally pissed off and storm the
castle. 

That's one version, anyway. Between the lines there's an implication
of unlikely conspiracy, but sometimes I wonder.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #224 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 20 Jan 12 08:12

    <scribbled by tcn Fri 20 Jan 12 08:12>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #225 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 20 Jan 12 08:20

    
We're going to have to have an honest and open conversation about
health care and end of life, here in the U.S.

Now that I've retired and am approaching my 65th birthday, this is my
year for Medicare and some semblance of health insurance. Choosing
Parts C and D are my big decisions for the year and the choices aren't
all that great.

I'm not sure I've ever "pulled my own weight". But, clearly, I'm
becoming a burden. I've seen all kinds of facts and figures...National
Health Care estimates as high as $2.5
trillion.(https://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/25_NHE_Fact_sheet.asp)

And a great proportion of that total is spent on "end of life",
prolonging or postponing the inevitable at questionable qualities of
life that even doctors who prescribe all this would not follow
themselves. (See "How doctors die?"
http://zocalopublicsquare.org/thepublicsquare/2011/11/30/how-doctors-die/read/
n
exus/)

It's all bizarre, yet part of my reality.  And at the same time I'm
feeling very entrepreneurial. Fortunately I have my wits and health,
at the moment, and a general sense that I still have another 20 years
or so of productivity. So, while I may not be able to do any heavy
lifting, I'm hoping to carry some of the load. And I think there are
going to be a lot of us "boomers" doing the same. We may actually turn
out to be the spark that lights up some of this dreary scenario.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #226 of 240: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Fri 20 Jan 12 09:40

    
Medicare has given me a sense of safety and freedom that I had been sadly 
lacking for the last 20 years due to a pre-existing condition from which 
I'd been cured 35 years ago.   That didn't matter to the health insurance 
companies And when I had lost my job-related insurance 25 or so years 
ago, the woman on the phone at one of the companies I applied to actually 
laughed when she told me to forget about it.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #227 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 20 Jan 12 10:49

    


Commonly I end these WELL things in some personal burst of visionary
eloquence. Last year, I wrote a long culture-critic essay all about
Cibelle.  Cibelle, the London-Sao Paulo multi-artist.  I just heard
from Cibelle.  Cibelle's still performing her music, in extravagant
costume, with video,  but she told me that she'd like to go to art
school and get an MFA in painting.  Could be a sign of the creative
times: if you're gonna do every possible artsy thing all at once, then
you might as well get good at it.

I concluded this isn't the year for writing any long, learned,
stick-to-the-point summations.  Instead, this is a unique year when,
during this State of the World discussion, I was actually living in
Lebkowsky's house.  Thanks for the hospitality, Jon!  Great to share
some analog geolocative presence!

Tomorrow, I head off to Mexico City to teach design school for a
month. You'll hear about this on Twitter if you follow @bruces.

The blog just upgraded to a new incarnation of Wordpress.  Check out
my new, upscale, toney and curatorial "Tech Art" section.

http://www.wired.com/beyond_the_beyond/category/tech-art/

So it's time to gently conclude the State of the World by venturing
off for tequila.  In a Texan cantina.  Chuy's.  We kinda need the
consolation, and that's as good a place as any.

Chuy's 
&#8234;4301 W William Cannon Dr, Austin, TX&#8236;

&#8234;(512) 899-2489 &#8236;

Should be there after 5:30 pm or so...  Drop on by, y'all.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #228 of 240: Peter Meuleners (pjm) Fri 20 Jan 12 10:52

    
"analog geolocative presence" is a great term.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #229 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 20 Jan 12 10:57

    
Wish I could share some "analog geolocative presence" and some nice
older tequila. Instead, a digital gesture of a toast to you and to the
future and to the beauty of the unfolding sky, from here in San
Francisco.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #230 of 240: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Fri 20 Jan 12 11:11

    
Great as always, thanks to both of you for your time and thinking out
loud. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #231 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 20 Jan 12 13:05

    
I just wandered in from a very good talk at the University of Texas by
Elizabeth Churchill of Yahoo Research
(http://elizabethchurchill.com/). I was there with my pals Gregory
Foster, Bill Anderson, and David Ryan, all Austin-based technologists.
Another friend, tech entrepreneur Tristan Slominski, was across the
room. The rest were mostly UT students.

Churchill is a psychologist and user experience expert whose done a
ton of research for Yahoo - much of it about how and why people engage
with websites and web communities. Google, Facebook, and Twitter get a
lot of attention for their social and collaborative spaces, but Yahoo
was there first, and has dug as deeply as anybody into the study of
online behaviors. I was reminded of a couple of things - how long we've
come in evolving the web environment, and how it's a totally human
environment... it's all behavior manifest in technology-mediated
environments. I've been working on and with the web for two decades
now, and I'm still completely fascinated. I love this work, even (or
especially) with the challenges we face today.

Churchill mentioned core values of Computer Human Interaction... I
think about most of these every day:

fulfillment
agency
identity
equality
subjectivity
reflection
empowerment
social justice

After two long weeks of discussion here on the WELL, itself a seminal
online community that's been operating for over 25 years, I'm feeling
perky: the world can work, we're going to do just fine. 

Hope some of you will show up at Chuy's later today.

And we'll be here again next year (maybe by then we'll have bought a
huge hippie house and started a commune...)
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #232 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 21 Jan 12 11:29

    
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/weltschmerz

Weltschmerz: mental depression or apathy caused by comparison of the
actual state of the world with an ideal state

Thanks and a tip o' the hat to Garry Golden for the pointer to this
relevant definition.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #233 of 240: David Gans (tnf) Sat 21 Jan 12 23:19

    
That's M-W's definition, really?  I was taught that it had to do with feeling
the pain of the world, not just being disappointed in it.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #234 of 240: Ed Ward (captward) Sun 22 Jan 12 04:44

    
And given that the German means world-pain, that makes more sense. 
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #235 of 240: Gail Williams (gail) Mon 23 Jan 12 10:02

    
There's a differentiation of meanings on this page 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weltschmerz
where a distinction is made between the modern German use of the word
and the original idea from the early 1800's
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #236 of 240: Karim Brohi (julieswn) Mon 23 Jan 12 18:53

    
Underlying many of the issues you discuss, it seems to me that there
is a fundamental unwillingness to understand, appreciate and
acknowledge the complexity of the world we live in.  Be it economics,
politics, healthcare, climate, technology - the underlying systems
complexity is increasing dramatically, while the media, statesmen,
policy makers etc insist on the soundbite, the easy answer, the
executive summary - and more worrying are supremely confident in their
understanding of the system and how to change it for the better.  

Until we have a big push at understanding complexity - and how to
communicate that complexity to the public - there will be very little
meaningful progress in any direction.  

Karim
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #237 of 240: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 12 01:48

    <scribbled by bruces Sun 30 Dec 12 01:49>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #238 of 240: Chris Marti (cmarti) Sun 30 Dec 12 06:54

    
How do you engender an appreciation for complexity? Seems to me that
human beings are just not wired for it. We like stories. Linearity.
Simple cause and effect with one cause and one effect.
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #239 of 240: Jeffrey W Kramer (jeffk) Sun 30 Dec 12 09:55

    <scribbled by jeffk Sun 30 Dec 12 09:56>
  

inkwell.vue.430 : Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky: State of the World 2012
permalink #240 of 240: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 12 10:46

    
If you're tempted to post here, this is last year's SOTW topic. Topic
459 is SOTW 2013.
  

