inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #0 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 2 Jan 03 06:21

    
Bruce Sterling is a science fiction writer and more - he's also known for
his work as a journalist, public speaker, pop entertainer, and futurist.  
Bruce, a longtime denizen of the WELL, takes some time from his packed
schedule at the first of each year to discuss the state of the world and
his vision of the future.  This year's visit happens to coincide with the
release of his latest book, _Tomorrow Now_, a consideration of the next
fifty years using a framework loosely derived from Shakespeare's "seven
ages of man": - the infant, the student, the lover, the soldier, the
justice, the pantaloon and "mere oblivion" (death). Here's how Bruce
relates those seven ages to technology-focused speculations about the
future:

"Stage One: The Infant concerns genetics, reproduction, and microbiology.  
Stage Two: The Student is about information networks and new paradigms for
the scholar. Stage Three: The Lover takes its cue from _Pygmalion_; it is
about postindustrial design and our fiercely passionate relationship to our
own creations. Stage Four: The Soldier is a war story about the growing New
World Disorder, the new century's greatest security threat. Stage Five: The
Justice tackles media and politics. Stage Six: The Pantaloon is a primer on
twenty-first century information economics. Stage Seven: Mere Oblivion is
about our struggle with morality and our assault on human limits."

Jon Lebkowsky, a consultant, activist and writer also living in Austin,
leads the discussion.  Currently best known for his weblog at
http://www.weblogsky.com, Lebkowsky focuses on internet, web, and other
emergent technologies and their cultural impact. He is CEO of Austin's
Polycot Consulting and President of EFF-Austin.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #1 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 2 Jan 03 06:26

    
Welcome back to inkwell.vue, Bruce! And welcome to all of our readers... 
those of you who are not members of the WELL but would like to participate 
in this discussion can send questions and comments to 
inkwell-hosts@well.com, and they'll be posted here pretty quickly.

Bruce, you're primarily a science fiction writer, but at times you're a
futurist, as in this latest nonfiction work, _Tomorrow Now_.  There seems
to be an inherent link between science fiction (at least *hard* science
fiction) and futurism ... but how do they differ? Doesn't the futurist have
specific ways of seeing and evaluating the future that is different from a
science-fiction approach? In writing _Tomorrow Now_, did you change your
way of thinking about the future?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #2 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 3 Jan 03 09:22

    
It's all about the revenue stream, Jon.

Science fiction is a form of popular entertainment.
Heavy duty industrial futurism is stuff like
forecasting the demand curve for freon-free refrigerators
in the American Midwest, 28-34 demographic.  You
might get paid for it --lots -- the report alone
might cost nine hundred bucks -- but Jesus, who
wants to read that?  Nobody WANTS to read it.
Conceivably, somebody might HAVE to read it.

What really happens is that the CEO is gonna
do whatever he wants anyway about the refrigerators,
and if anybody on the board of directors dares to
cross him, he drops the 900-page futurist report
on their desk and dares them to read it.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #3 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 3 Jan 03 09:26

    
On the other hand, every once in a while
it's a good idea to knock the moss and
algae off your received wisdom.

I knew a long time ago that when the
turn of the millennium came around I
would be a middle-aged guy.  I promised
myself I would take some time off then
and try to re-educate myself so I wouldn't
THINK SO MUCH like a middle-aged guy.

Unfortunately, I can't make myself think
like a young guy, because I know too much
and I've lost so much physical vitality, but on
the other hand, after writing this book TOMORROW NOW,
I think about the future like a middle-aged guy
who is VERY, VERY ENGAGED.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #4 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 3 Jan 03 11:52

    
What was it about writing the book that helped you become more engaged? And 
what led you to Shakespeare's "seven ages" as a framework? Is that 
something you had in mind for a while, or did the concept evolve while you 
were researching and writing?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #5 of 111: Myles Byrne (jonl) Fri 3 Jan 03 16:25

    
Email from Myles Byrne:

Did you get the idea to use the 7 Ages as the framework from Burning Man
2001, which used the Seven Ages as it's theme and even for street names? If
so, is _Tomorrow Now_ a book you see Black Rock Citizens using as a bible
for next-stage mass experiments after Burning Man? (We could use a more
parseable Ur-text than _Dhalgren_.)
 
Also, have you been influenced by other 'post-Jungian Futurisms' such as
Strauss & Howe's _Fourth Turning_ (which uses four archetypes) and
(Texas-born) Spiral Dynamics?
 
Could you speak to your intents and experiences using a 'post Jungian'
schema of archetypes for patterning _Tomorrow Now_? For instance, do you
believe a mythic structure like the 7 Ages can serve as a grassroots
rallying point?
 
Thanks,
Myles Byrne
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #6 of 111: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Fri 3 Jan 03 16:29

    
What are the major technological advances that you see for the rest of 
your lifetime and how will they affect you personally?  
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #7 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 4 Jan 03 12:39

    
I can't believe I'm reduced to creeping onto the WELL
through a free AOL account.  I'm the slave of Case!
Is Steve even in business any more?  I actually feel sorry
for him.

The thing I liked best about that Shakespeare pitch
is that it's about the passage of time as a carnal
experience.  It's the future as something lived, in
the flesh. something tactile and visceral.  
I liked that preindustrial gutsiness there,
the lack of grand glittering abstractions.

I also liked it that he talks about the *hardware*
associated with various stages of life, stuff
like schoolboy's satchels and soldier's cannons.

The book is a series of linked essays about
major change drivers native to the 21st century,
but if you want people to read a book, you
can't just start riffing and go for 60,000
words.  You need some kind of framework.
A sense of propulsion and narrative traction.  
I felt that one might work, and it turns
out that it does.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #8 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 4 Jan 03 12:46

    
Could you speak to your intents and experiences using a 'post Jungian'
schema of archetypes for patterning _Tomorrow Now_? For instance, do
you
believe a mythic structure like the 7 Ages can serve as a grassroots
rallying point?
 

*Myles, my man, I sense the fatal reek of newage here.  
There is just no way that Shakespeare is "post-Jungian."

*I've been to Burning Man and I had a pretty good time,
but that doesn't mean I abandoned all critical rationality
on the playa.  Okay, granted, at the geyser in the mudhole,
I abandoned critical rationality there for about an
hour and a half, but then I got it all back and became
the hardened reductionist atheist skeptic that I've been
for years.

*If I needed a "grassroots rallying point," the very
LAST place I would pick is a barren desert where everyone
is naked, in drag or on psychedelics.  A place with
some VOTING BOOTHS, dude,  and people who are, like
sober enough to punch out all the hanging chad, that's
what a pro would want.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #9 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 4 Jan 03 12:55

    
In the first section - "The Infant" - you pretty much dismiss human cloning 
in favor of genome hacking to make, not children who are similar to their 
parents, but children who are superior. Cloning's a big deal lately, at 
least with UFO cults... do you think it's an inherent first step in 
manipulating genes?  (I'm tempted to imagine a vast army of Raelian 
superclones goose-stepping down Broadway....)
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #10 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 4 Jan 03 13:10

    
I think these Raelians (assuming that they didn't just make it all up)
are guilty of an unconscionable act of child abuse.  But I think
they've done us all a favor with this particular propaganda of the
deed.  It might have taken us years to figure out that cloning infants
is not a big deal, but a crazy aberration that only stupid cultists
would pull. 

Now it's gonna be obvious to anybody who bothers to think the
issue through.

Al Qaeda, Aum Shinri Kyo, Raelians, they're all wealthy 
multinational cults repurposing hardware invented by cleverer
people.  And they can't build anything.  They bring wrack
and ruin.  Those Raelians aren't pioneers of anything, they're
just going to bring the patchouli stench of lunacy over
everything from stem cells to fertility treatments.

I make an argument in TOMORROW NOW that if you want
to mess with DNA the ideal DNA is bacterial DNA, for
a lot of practical, industrial reasons.  It's an argument
against the grain, but I think time is going to bear me
out here.  
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #11 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 4 Jan 03 13:59

    
Hold the eugenics, pass the microbes. But are we in danger, then, of 
creating an accidental 'Andromeda strain'? That's a traditional science 
fiction argument, no? 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #12 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 5 Jan 03 06:28

    
I wouldn't describe Andromeda Strain as an "argument."  I think
that's better described as a "dramatization."

Robots are a dramatization of automation.  "Hey look,
we don't need manual laborers.  They'll be replaced by
sophisticated machines.  They'll be like proletarians,
only more obedient. But WHAT IF ONE MARRIES YOUR DAUGHTER?
Aieee!"

But if the real issue is improving factory assembly, it makes
no commercial sense to build a two-legged artificial 
humanoid.  Real assembly robots, that make real money,
are basically one giant arm and a couple of videocams.

Humanoid robots are dramatization devices exclusively,
they are stars of stage and screen, or they're led around
by sexy booth-babes to do headline-grabbing demos.

So, yeah, we'll probably have all kinds of problems
with tame microbes, but it'll be like the problems
with microbes we already do have: spoilage, bad
yeast, dysentery, that kind of thing.  Having
one of them suddenly kill everybody in the whole
world, that's just a cheap way to stop thinking
about the real problem.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #13 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 5 Jan 03 11:08

    
You talk about the "wailing, sleepless, septic mess" that is early
parenthood, and follow that with a paragraph about "seething DNA...furious
arguments, grim responsibility, ansious compromise, and seriously wrecked
routines." I.e. the future of genetics is messy, complicated, a little
nuts, and totally human. That made me think of the imagery of the Viridian
Design web site, suggesting both fertility and decay, an organic grunge,
something to offend sterile design sensibilities (too common on the web). 
Are you drawn to the messier aspects of human existence? Would you rather 
observe and appreciate these messier aspects of human existance than clean 
'em up? 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #14 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 5 Jan 03 18:44

    

Yeah, the issue has got its aesthetic aspects and I
take a certain connoisseur's pleasure in them.  It
was running "Dead Media Project" and writing a
"steampunk" novel that made me aware of the
intense romance in defunct and rotting technologies.

But it's not a question of my personal preference.
Organic means of production are wet by their nature,
they are gooey and splattery and profligate.  You
can't approach them effectively with old-fashioned
mechanical engineering.

For instance, if you try to augment a broken human thighbone
with a steel brace screwed into the bone, it soon
fails because the rest of the bone wastes away.
A live thighbone is not just a weight-bearing
member, it is an ongoing organic process.  If you take
the stress off that bone, the calcium will
leach away into the body to serve other purposes.
You can still engineer bone, but you need a sophisticated
biomedical engineering that is aware of wet,
salty, hot metabolism inside the flesh. If
it's gooey and sticky, it's no use your flinching.
If you're going to do it at all, learn to do
it right.

One of "the messiest aspects of human existence"
is when we are a single-celled organism.  We've
never really gotten our heads around this aspect
of our own identity. 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #15 of 111: TOM GEORGOULIAS writes... (tnf) Sun 5 Jan 03 20:08

    


From Tom Georgoulias:

Bruce:

I was wondering why you chose not to address the effect of patents on
future technology development.  You came sort of close to the topic in
"The Justice", but as that section was more about political and
government influence on the network it didn't really delve into just
what patents may do for/to us.  Recent articles in the "New Scientist,"
"MIT Technology Review", and "New York Times" have all pointed to a
increasing trend of locking up scientific knowledge with restrictive
patents, especially in the software and biotechnology fields.
--
Tom Georgoulias
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #16 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 6 Jan 03 13:14

    
*That's a good question.

*The next to last chapter of the book concerns itself
with intellectual property and business models.
This business of "locking up scientific knowledge"
is hugely interesting to me.  In fact I just wrote
a short article about that for an upcoming
WHOLE EARTH mag.

*We've got schools of thought, sometimes on the
same webpage, that postulate a total mindblowing superscience
Singularity breakthrough that renders all human
history moot overnight, and then at the same
time imagines this Orwellian numbed ADBUSTERS world
where the Carlyle Group patents the laws of physics
and Monsanto makes chemistry a trade secret.

*But we can't possibly have both of those worlds at
the same time, unless, you know, you read
SLASHDOT a lot.  They are in a dynamic tension
which is getting stupider and uglier by the day,
and something  big is gonna give.  

*Could well be the Internet. We may find ourselves in a
form of Soviet Capitalism where a new Patent
Securitate puts a Palladium serial number inside every
typewriter.  If your economic model is widely
derided and phony baloney, then that's the sort
of thing you've pretty much got to do.   You
'can always claim that the alternative is chaos --
and if you're really smart, you'll take some steps
to see that all the possible alternatives STAY chaos.

*Personally, I'm rather well-known as an
information-wants-to-be-free zealot,
but I'm one of these rare guys who takes
the trouble to make some of HIS OWN
information free.  
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #17 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 6 Jan 03 18:59

    
I find myself wondering whether the case for "free" has a future, though 
there are compelling arguments... "creative commons," free software, open 
source alternatives, that sort of thing. Surely profit's not the only 
incentive pushing innovation?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #18 of 111: (jacob) Mon 6 Jan 03 22:33

    

I just picked this up at Borders (shelved under Sociology, so it took a
database search to find it) and I just finished the Soldier chapter.  Bear
with me if I'm missing points made or summed-up later in the book, but it
seems in the Soldier chapter you focus very much on a particular type of
player in the recent conflicts in the world (Arkan, Catli, etc) and, well,
mostly on the events of the 90s.  Obviously I see your point in picking out
this advance threads you think will develop more, and the biographies are
really fascinating, but I wondered if that was most of your picture of the
next 50 or so years of warfare?

Also, the focus there is on the balkans, turkey, and the former USSR, but
what do you think about Africa (particularly west and central Africa) and
Southeast Asia?  In Africa in particular it seems like the former colonial
powers are getting involved again, and those conflict seem distinctly
different from the middle-east/central asian confrontations that rate more
attention right now, to me at least.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #19 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 03 09:01

    

*Yeah, my chapter on the military is about warlords of the
1990s, but I hammer on that because I don't think people
get it yet.  They don't get it that large sections of
the "developing world" are not developing at all but
descending into armed narcoterror.  And that this,
not other states, is the major security threat in
the future.

Arkan and Catli are of particular interest because they
were both *anti* terrorists who tore civil society to
shreds while getting rich off state-supported death squads.
Now that you know how Abdullah Catli operated (and he
was pretty far from a household word in the USA) try
comparing the USA of 1998 to the USA of 2003.  Which
one would make Catli happier?  Which one wants to
hire and arm a lot of Catlis?  

Yes he is dead, but that guy isn't behind us -- he
is AHEAD OF US.

As for Basaev, he is not a 90s guy, he
is a major contemporary figure. He is very likely the guy who just
sent two suicide truck bombs into the core of
the Chechnyan puppet government and blew the
living daylights out of it.  He was also,
probably, one of the major planners of the
Moscow theater hostage seizure.  Basaev is
showing way more liveliness and initiative
than any other Moslem guerrilla.

As for Africa, it is just colossally awful.
Africa doesn't matter to any power broker who counts,
but it's really sort of amazing that such
a huge area of the planet can be cheerfully
abandoned to plague, looting, rapine and
savagery.  

If you blew up North Korea's junta with
a bunker-buster, the regime would likely
collapse like a house of cards, but try that
in Somalia.  The US military doesn't even
want to TALK about Somalia.  They don't
want to go anywhere near it.  They'd
rather come up with Axes of Evil so they
can have some states to blow up.  It's
like being a hammer when the house is on
fire, and looking around for some nails.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #20 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 7 Jan 03 09:25

    
I find myself wondering whether the case for "free" has a future,
though 
there are compelling arguments... "creative commons," free software,
open source alternatives, that sort of thing. Surely profit's not the
only  incentive pushing innovation?

*Well, a lot of concepts sound great on paper or on a screen.
"From each according to his abilities, to each according to his
needs," that sounds cool and alternative.  But, you know, where's the
demo?


*There are plenty of incentives pushing innovation.
"Innovation" is a nice word, but innovation with some
staying power and some practical traction in daily life, that's
another matter.

*For instance, I've got "ThinkFree" office suite on my Mac,
but it's so clumsy, slow and badly designed that the thrill
of ideological correctness soon wore off.  A genuinely
successful technology can't carry that much of a cognitive
load.  It can't divorce itself from profit and try to
run forever on sublime feelings of moral superiority.  If there
is a "future for free," then free has to actually function and work,
unquestioned and below the level of conscious awareness.  Free would
just have to be the way things were.  And if you look at the way things
are where free is, it's interesting, but it's not all that great.

If you look at, say, Internet streaming media, you can
see that there is a lot of fun free stuff offered, but
it's almost all hobbyist stuff. It's free like hotel
matches are free.  Nobody has found a method yet to raise
50 million dollars, make GONE WITH THE WIND and give
that away online.  If you have a huge burn rate and no revenue stream,
well, you just can't keep it up.

The sort of artwork that thrives in the Internet
medium is stuff like that guy who makes those weird
little singing puppet cats.  The kittens that do
versions of other people's rock songs.  Note that
these are not even the artist's original songs.
It's a free-use parody, it's appropriated and cut-up.  
It's hysterically, and he gets blogged all over, 
but, you know, in terms of cinema, this is like 
a college student at a party doing 
karaoke with a lampshade over his head.

  
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #21 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 03 10:35

    <scribbled by jonl Wed 8 Jan 03 03:10>
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #22 of 111: Tom Georgoulias (jonl) Tue 7 Jan 03 20:21

    
Email from Tom Georgoulias:

Profit, at least in the monetary sense of the word, is not the only thing
pushing innovation.  I firmly believe that.

I'm typing this response on the demo of a concept of "from each according
to his abilities, to each according to his needs."  I have on my computer a
completely free operating system and slew of applications to go with it.  
The OS guts are ultra solid, my Internet tools (browser, mailer, etc) are
on par or exceed their commercial counterparts, and the GUI is easy to use.  
It isn't junk by any measurement.  I've seen my employer pay thousands of
dollars for software that is much worse that what I am using now, all of
which I got for nothing.  Zip.  Zero.  Nada.

I look at free software as a way of applying the scientific method to
programming.  Equations and theories are freely shared among scientists,
who trade them back and forth and do whatever they want with them in their
labs.  They report back what they find and the whole process repeats
itself.  Same with free software.  Programmers get parts they need from
other programmers, write code for the parts they're lacking, then pass
those along to even more programmers.  The stuff that works tends to stick
around, the stuff that doesn't dies off.  Just like theories.

Here's an example of free actually functioning:  the Apache web server.  
Something like half the servers on the Internet run Apache and it comes
bundled with servers sold by huge, profit driven computer companies neck
deep in the white knuckle race to stay in the game.  It doesn't require a
level of conscious awareness either, Apache just does the job it was
designed to do.  Profit didn't get it started either, it came from the
normal process of hackers sharing code with each other.

Perhaps it is better to say that the type of non-profit driven innovation
that thrives on the Internet is the stuff that hackers deal in.  Think of
it as hacker currency.  The hackers were there first, when money wasn't the
primary factor.  They were still there when the cash clowns tried to pull a
fast one and make the Internet a fountain of wealth.  They'll be there to
shut the place down too, if it ever comes to that.

Money doesn't run _everything_.
-- 
Tom Georgoulias
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #23 of 111: David Adam Edelstein (davadam) Tue 7 Jan 03 20:51

    
The question that has to be asked, of course, is "what are they doing
to feed and house themselves that allows them to spend hundreds of
hours making great software that they give away for free?"

I'd be willing to bet that not all of the code they write is given
away for free, and not just because (full disclosure) I work for the
Borg.  I share your distaste for the "cash clowns" (great term), but I
also don't think that charging for software is necessarily a bad thing.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #24 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 03 03:18

    
In your second chapter, on "The Student," you dismiss "artificial 
intelligence," again in favor of what's messy, organic, and human. You say 
that "the aspects of ourselves that are least machinelike are the ones 
with the greatest technological promise." What are the implications for 
education? What should today's kids be thinking about, aside from Pokemon, 
Yugi-oh, and DragonBall-Z?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #25 of 111: Tom Georgoulias (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 03 03:38

    
Email from Tom Georgoulias:

I don't think charging for software is a bad thing either.  I just wanted
to provide some concrete examples of where non-profit driven innovation is
more than just ideology, but actual working and useful technology.

A lot of free software is developed by people who are working somewhere and
use free software in that job, but not necessarily as the main product or
service of that company.  For example, chip designers who use gcc to
compile their designs and then share patches that fix compiler bugs they've
discovered.  Or it comes from academia, where it is a common chore for
departments to make a computers out of hardware junk heaps.  Or programmers
who don't find their day jobs mentally stimulating enough.  It seems there
are all sorts of reasons why people write free software.  I don't know all
of the reasons why, but the code is out there and gets better all the time.

I absolutely think there is a need for a "creative commons" that houses
fundamental modern science and technology for the benefit of everyone,
unencumbered by patents.  Patents are tools, and like most tools they can
be used for good and evil.  I think there is plenty of reason to be
concerned about how patents will affect us in the future.  It is an issue
that will require some careful consideration and an incredible balancing
act.

Bruce, care to share some of what you said in your upcoming Whole Earth
article?

 -- Tom Georgoulias
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #26 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 03 07:36

    
*Well, among the points I make in that article is
that basic scientific research is not driven by immediate
profit payoff.  Basic science isn't the same as industrial
research and development.  

Bell Labs used to come up with stuff that created entire
new industries.  Compare that to today's telephone companies,
who can't decide if they are natural monopolies, profit-driven
competitors or just plain Enrons.

The military isn't in it for the money, and they are
a huge source of innovation.

Government is not-for-profit and even bureaucracies
invent stuff sometimes.

Academia has a number of different business models
but if you are working in a university lab, lining
your own pockets is not supposed to be your
number-one consideration.

Science fiction writers make stuff up and write
entertainment about it.  It's rare for us to stop
typing and go get a patent.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #27 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 03 08:28

    

I enjoy a free-software flame as much as the next guy
and more than most.  After 17 years of GNU, though, we
ought to well past the point of explaining to people
that there are alternate methods of creating software.
Free software is even older than commercial software, or
else IBM would never have sort of shrugged and let
Bill Gates "own" the operating system.

Free software works sorta, and it works much better if you
are the kind of guy who has it together to write some
yourself.  But it's not a panacea or a perfect solution
any more than commercial software is.  Apache works
pretty well, and if Apache didn't work, then the industry
would ignore free software the way Hollywood ignores
that guy making the dancing singing cats on his website.
It works well enough that it gets some attention.  It isn't
working well enough for 200 dollar Lindows machines from Walmart
to take the planet by storm.


Maybe someday.  I'm rooting for it, actually.  But
I'm getting used to the idea that free software is going
to remain clunky, ugly and unfriendly to Joe Sixpack
and Jane Winecooler.  There's nothing new about that,
and there aren't really many motives for free software
people to please anybody besides other free software people.

The thing that is increasingly intriguing to me is that
commercial software people have a crisis that's worse.
They are forced to turn their programs and
hardware into malignant, scarcely usable, Orwellian
spy devices in order to save their weird business model.

They are going into the same evil space that the airline industry is.
"Where do you want to go today?  Well, first let me smell
the inside of your shoes.  Are you a pirate, are you
a terrorist kidporn mafioso?  Prove it.  Stand there,
sign this.  Okay, now give me money.  You wan't pay?
Okay, then maybe I'll get the government to bail me out so
it comes out of your taxes."

And the airports are emptying and bankruptcies are
endemic.  Boeing can't sell a faster airplane.


We may get into a condition where people hate and fear
commercial software, and free software is barely usable
and semilegal or illegal.  What happens in that scenario?

I think the Information Age goes into the same historical
dumpster as the glamorous dreams of the Space Age.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #28 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 03 08:30

    

*I've always been less interested in education than
scholarship.  Everybody is legally required to get educated,
and for good reasons, most people loathe this painful thing and quit
as soon as they can financially survive getting away with that,
or sooner, if it hurts them enough.

Scholarship, though, is acquiring and organizing knowledge with
sufficient
rigor that you actually understand what you are talking about
and can communicate that in a cohesive, reproducible way
to other people.  I'm interested in that because I can't do it.
I'm very curious, I'm a lifelong bookworm and my brain
is littered with fantastic clutter, but I'm an entertainer,
not a scholar.  I'm popularizing concepts sometimes, but I'm not
adding much of anything to humanity's general store of knowledge.
A science fiction writer is like a guy bowling with cannonballs.

Nowadays I learn a lot of stuff off the Internet; I'd never
even think to stop and take a class in anything, or aim
for another degree.  Professors are increasingly upset
at students Googling term papers or Blackberrying test
answers to each other.  An FAQ and a Google search
will winkle out some of the most arcane stuff in the
world with incredible rapidity. But it's also lacks
certification and intellectual rigor, it is producing a kind
of Golden Age of Charlatanry.

My advice to kids in this book is to get into a line
of work they enjoy learning about.  You have to find
a proclivity.  Most societies don't treat education like this:
there are thousands of Iranian doctors and almost
no Iranian dentists;  when the Chinese want rocket
scientists, they don't wait for bright kids to get in the mood.
But it's a great bliss in life to be sincerely interested
in what you do to earn a living, and if school fails
to teach you that, then it's failed you.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #29 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Wed 8 Jan 03 08:44

    
Bruce, a data-point. You use free software all the time. OS X is built on
it.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #30 of 111: Reid Harward (reid) Wed 8 Jan 03 10:36

    

Doesn't http://www.viridiandesign.org use MySQl?

Why are Joe and Jane such an appealing demographic besides the fact that
they buy books?  Do they buy books?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #31 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 03 12:20

    
> Doesn't http://www.viridiandesign.org use MySQl?

Not yet!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #32 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 03 12:26

    
If you were the honcho at the Ministry of Education, and your task was to 
make schools work as learning environments, what would you change?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #33 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Wed 8 Jan 03 14:23

    
To expand on that point. Your Mac is like a mile-high skyscraper of elegant
and robust design, created by invisible, volunteer labor. You get a free
penthouse in that skyscraper, but in order to appoint that swanky pad,
you've got to pay a pricey designer -- Apple -- a hundred bucks or so to put
in the sofas and the wet-bar. Because the penthouse was free, it's
unobtrusive, and only the swell designer furniture catches your attention,
so there's a sense that the skyscraper is irrelevant as compared to the
labor of the designer.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #34 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 03 17:19

    
I don't use Mac OSX all the time, Cory.
It doesn't have a word processor I like,
which is a pretty serious drawback for
a guy who types for a living.

I also get it totally about cool, far-out
metaphors about the grunt work of software.
Mile high skyscrapers, cathedrals, bazaars,
landslides in cyberspace, man you are talking
to a connoisseur here.  But it's talk.
There comes a point when you don't want
to talk.  A bicycle is a marvelously
elegant technology too, and I can buy
the designer carbon and titanium one,
or I can even get the free, politically correct,
Yellow Bike anarchist one.  But, you know,
flat tire. Pump.  Does it work?  Stop explaining.
I don't need more explaining.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #35 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 8 Jan 03 17:22

    
If I were head honcho of the Ministry of Education,
my job would not be to make schools work as learning
environments.  Basically, my job would be to make
school-age children walk in straight lines and
salute the flag as I freed up the productive
capacity of their parents.

If schools were learning environments, all the smart
kids would clear out in half an hour.  Then they'd
go home and demand attention from Mom and Dad.
That just can't be allowed.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #36 of 111: Reid Harward (reid) Wed 8 Jan 03 17:48

    
How about Jane and Joe?  How much of this responsibility falls on
their shoulders?   Shouldn't we be wondering why these bums can't get
up off the couch and pitch in when it comes to creating open-source? 
With all of these cool digital tools at their disposal, shouldn't this
slack couple be transforming themselves into super-creators as opposed
to just vapid consumers of digital media?  

The amateur has a role in your future, I hope.  What about blogs? 
Don't blogs show that there is at least a desire to create media? 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #37 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 8 Jan 03 20:07

    
I finally saw Michael Moore's "Bowling for Columbine," which includes a 
couple of visits to schools and guns... lots of guns. Maybe that's what we 
should be talking about... GUNS.  This should probably segue into a riff 
about 'The Soldier,' but I'm actually wondering about the future of guns in 
the hands of ordinary civilians with anxieties heightened by exposure to 
televised crime and war fantasies (I'm talking about the news, not the 
action-adventure jive).
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #38 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 05:49

    

I don't see why Joe Sixpack and Jane Winecooler
are any more obliged to help out with free software
than they are to help out with free bicycles.
It's a little arrogant to assume that they are
just inert.  Maybe they've got their own problems.

I'm all in favor of people being more creative
but creativity because of a sense of guilt
doesn't appeal to me much.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #39 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 05:53

    
I just saw a cable channel documentary on swords
axes and knives.  The last part was about Victorinox,
maker of Swiss Army knives.

A pretty good example of military-sponsored innovation.
It pointed out that the worldwide vogue for them
didn't start until GIs in World War II got their
hands on some.  Then, rather like jeeps, they civilianizes
and became more luxurious.  Nowadays there are over
a hundred models of them.

And, of course, I am no longer allowed to take mine
on an aircraft because I might be a member of Al Qaeda,
the Islamic Lafayette Escadrille, and I might destroy
a skyscraper with my two-inch metal blade.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #40 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 03 06:06

    
There's a scene in Moore's film that was snipped from some source, like
maybe a training film, that shows a middle-aged woman explaining why
schools should have uniform dress codes. While she's talking we see a kid
in baggy pants with his shirttail out, and he starts pulling guns out of
his pants.  He's got about a ton of concealed weaponry, including a rifle
that was stuck down the leg of his pants.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #41 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 08:24

    

Yeah, and think how many pirated CDs he's got in there.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #42 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 03 09:23

    
While my blood was boiling over, I nearly skipped stage 3 - the lover. This
is your chapter on design, where you talk about "organic behavior in a 
technological matrix." What does this mean?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #43 of 111: off-well participation (tnf) Thu 9 Jan 03 10:15

    

This one is signed "Anon":





Hello Mr. Sterling,

I noticed from your post(#28) that you would like to
see more scholarly research done. Also, from your
post(#39) you saw a cable program about Swords, Axes
and Knives. Is this the one on the History Channel?

I did get good advice from one of my professors on how
to look at these programs for some scholarship. He
points out that the narration voice is almost always
giving you incorrect knowledge. If you want to get
anything scholarly out of the documentaries then pay
close attention when they have someone actually
speaking. If he's a Ph D at a University then chances
are his information is scholarly. The history channel
not to long ago had a good program about Sparta with
well known scholars in that field.

A good example of "How the Narrator Misinforms" is to
look at various documentaries about the biblical
flood. Almost always the narrator excludes that the
same story was going around in other ancient civs.

Personally, I missed this point and had the "oh-yeah,
why didn't I think of that" line when my professor
pointed it out.

Thankyou for your time,

Anon
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #44 of 111: Brian Dear (brian) Thu 9 Jan 03 12:37

    <scribbled by brian Wed 20 Mar 13 18:15>
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #45 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 16:50

    
(bruces), why do so many of your posts in this topic have 
these asterisks at the beginning of each of your paragraphs?  


*You know, I'd like to pretend that it's just a nervous
habit of mine, but it's a really old one.

*I use those asterisks so that I can cut and paste stuff
from other sources into my email. 

*Thanks to these asterisks, people know that it is Me
speaking, the Narrator Who Misinforms.

*You'll want to look carefully at that stuff without the
asterisks as it may have been stolen from an actual
scholar.

*Thank you for your attention.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #46 of 111: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 9 Jan 03 17:06

    
It's an interesting effect.  All footnotes.

Say, Bruce, I want to thank you for suggesting I actually read Salman
Rushdie this year, rather than simply know his name as a literary light and
enemy of fundamentalism.

I read "Satanic Verses" and your own "Zeitgeist" almost as a set, and I
liked that quite a bit.

So, who are you reading now?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #47 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 17:10

    
"Organic behavior in a technological matrix."
What does this mean?

*Another great question.  I'm not quite sure what
it means.  I'm pretty sure it's really happening,
though.

*I think maybe this can be summed up in the native
21st century experience of pausing with a laden
fork halfway to your mouth and wondering just how
much technological ingenuity has been invested
in that forkfull of foodstuff.  There it is,
you know...  "caulobroccoflower" or whatever that
is... dipped in that so-called "cheese sauce"....

*You can put the fork down and go to the hippie grocery
and get some organic substances that spend a lot
of time and energy telling you how "natural"
they are, and how jealously sheltered they are
from an incoming tide of bovine hormones,
copyrighted genetics, antibiotics, weedkillers
and so forth...  But how "natural" is that?

*And besides, given that the air is full of
CO2 from industrial fossil fuels, aren't
the world's most "natural" plants, even
in the remotest parts of the Amazon,
substantially built of smokestack effluent?

*So you eat the stuff on the fork.  And now
it's part of you.

*That's not exactly what it means, but maybe
that's a little bit of how it feels.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #48 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 17:20

    
I read "Satanic Verses" and your own "Zeitgeist" almost as a set, and
I
liked that quite a bit.

So, who are you reading now?


*Well, I'd love to claim I am reading something
really elegant and literary and wrily subversive,
but in point of fact I'm reading a book called
ANGLES OF ATTACK: AN A-6 INTRUDER PILOT'S WAR,
and it's written by this hot-shot Navy aviator
who blows up Iraqis in our most recent Gulf War
but one.

*It's an amazingly dull book, but it's dull
in a kind of interesting way.  It's dull
like watching NASA cable access.  I mean,
here are these guys *in orbit,* doing something
incredible and technically advanced, but it's
all inventories and safety checks and acronyms.

*This ANGLES OF ATTACK book has page after page
of eye-burningly detailed, almost Ballardian
narrative about exactly how one buckles in
to the cockpit in one's crash helmet and
inflatable nylon flight suit.  It's really
pretty far from conventional men's-adventure
History Channel military-porn, but as a human
witness it's really kind of compelling.
It's like reading Pepys, almost.

*And Samuel Pepys has his own 17th century daily weblog
now, too.  That kills me. I mean, not in the
literal sense.  That was the author's job in
this ANGLES OF ATTACK thing.  And there is
no question he achieved considerable success
at that, too.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #49 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 9 Jan 03 20:34

    
Going back to those red hot microbes for a minute, I just ran across this 
story at New Scientist:

>>>
Data stored in multiplying bacteria
 
11:02 08 January 03
 
NewScientist.com news service

A message encoded as artificial DNA can be stored within the genomes of 
multiplying bacteria and then accurately retrieved, US scientists have 
shown.

Their concern that all current ways of storing information, from paper to 
electronic memory, can easily be lost or destroyed prompted them to devise 
a new type of memory - within living organisms. 

(continued at http://www.newscientist.com/news/news.jsp?id=ns99993243)
<<<
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #50 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 9 Jan 03 22:17

    
And you know, you can have another copy of that in 
20 minutes.

Copy a human being, man, you're looking at 20 years,
and about year 5 that kid realizes what you have
pulled on him and he becomes one of your deadliest enemies.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #51 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 10 Jan 03 06:50

    
Which will happen anyway when he hits puberty, right?

I get your point, but I'm not so sure... would they even notice? Or would 
they think, hey, I'm *just like Dad*, and think that's pretty neat?

I think what people fear about cloning is the concept of mass production - 
factories for creating human beings for specific purposes, where we lose 
the mystery, where human life becomes a commodity. Or other sinister 
applications ... "The Boys from Brazil," where Mengele clones Hitler (but 
he has to duplicate other factors of Hitler's life to get an exact match 
over time).
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #52 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 03 07:29

    
I'm not too worried personally about "losing the mystery."
I recognize that this is an important psychological driver
for a lot of people, but people who really need the stark
facts of life made more genteel by a mystical fog can always
make up some New Age hokum to deceive themselves.

I don't think that the factory=model clone works out
any more than the robot works out.  If you look at
BRAVE NEW WORLD, where people have all kinds of test-tube
baby castes and classes, well, that is a wonderfully
prescient book in many ways, but it's a satire.  The
world of BRAVE NEW WORLD has no future of its own.
Nothing is happening there, it has no arc of development.
There is no social innovation, and technology is going
nowhere.  Knowledge has ceased to expand.

It's a vision of society as an industrial
machine, and societies aren't industrial machines.
Even our industrial machines aren't industrial machines
any more.  
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #53 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 10 Jan 03 10:25

    
Is that why so much of science fiction isn't really all that prophetic? 
Because it's based on a mechanistic (or inorganic?) perception of the 
future?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #54 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 03 13:38

    
I tend to think it's "not all that prophetic" because
"prophecy" is impossible even in theory.

And it's even worse than that.  Prediction doesn't
work, and retrodiction doesn't work all that great
either.  Every historical epoch reassesses and
re-explains every previous historical epoch.  We
can scarcely grapple with the past with any more
ease and certainty than we do with the future.

The twenty-first century's idea of the 14th century
is radically different than the 18th century's idea
of the 14th century.   What the 18th century historians
cared about was stuff like what the landed
gentry were up to and what the Pope said,
and what we are into is stuff like computerized
records tracing the septic spread of bubonic
plague with a sense of amazed horror.

It wouldn't have occurred to the 18th century
to do that.  They didn't have databases and
they didn't know microbes existed.  So we can
now "explain" the 14th century from a different
perspective than they had, but the 23rd
century will also look on our version of  past events
with a condescending smile.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #55 of 111: nape fest (zorca) Fri 10 Jan 03 15:52

    
hi bruce. just finished the book. so cogent and thought-provoking.
particularly when mapped against our so-called news. prompting me to ask a
question.

several threads knit the various sections together, but one that i find
particularly troubling is the future of democracy. early in the book, you
quote emerson, who wrote that one of the virtues of the truly educated is
"...a sturdy democratic scorn for the weary truism of decadent aristocracy."
if only.

later, you write "Technocracy's dominance is firmly based on a general
conviction that political activism isn't likely to get you anything worth
having. Wherever technocracy thrives, voter turnouts dwindle as a matter of
course."

you go on to argue for "...physical strongholds and some model polities,"
stating as examples, forward-thinking cities that might attract both
citizens and economies that bring prosperity and improved quality of life.

my bags are already packed but meanwhile, we labor in a world dominated by
multinationals with "...a hammerlock on titanic sums of money. They can
afford better lawyers than a national government can. Or they can just buy
themselves a nicer government." ha.

i'll admit to my own numbing anomie in the face of all this. at my best, i
at least worry about my privacy and threatened rights. i guess what i'm
asking is whether you see any viable actions that individuals might take,
either within the technosphere or, you know, meat space, that shore up a
sense of democracy and free expression? that might actually have some
effect?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #56 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 10 Jan 03 17:37

    

Well, when it comes to free expression, there's
really no substitute for expressing yourself freely.
As George Orwell said, in a period of general
deceit, telling the truth becomes a revolutionary act.
As things become dumber and more numb, as more
and more people succumb to self-censorship or
intimidation, it matters more and more that you,
personally, just level with people.

Vaclav Havel called it "Living in Truth," and it doesn't
require a TV station or a massive PR budget.

Also, you should be pretty content with your lot
if you say something and five or ten people
pay attention.  This seems pretty modest and
pathetic, but if you happen to say something and
twenty million people pay attention to you, your life
will be unrecognizable afterwards.  I don't care
if it's political or just "23 skidoo" or "where's the beef,"
you will be known to your dying day as that guy or gal
who said "where's the beef," and man, you will get
STUCK with that.

THAT is the "effective" part of what you said, but
it is never the thing you liked best.  And it's never
the thing you thought was most important. And
they don't even quite understand what you meant
by it.  And you are hopelessly famous for it.  And you can't
get famous for the thing you want to be famous for.
This happens all the time.  It's kind of the secret
tragedy of all those people who seem really confident
and outspoken and influential.

If you lack the eloquence to speak out, you can
always say kind and supportive and worshipful
things to people who do speak out.  They always
pretend that they don't care, but even fanmail from
idiots secretly pleases these people.  They read it
and think "hey wow, I'm stealing the audience from
Fox News," and it just feels great.

When it comes to political activism, most everybody
wants to devote their attention to their own side;
the good people, the decent people, the People Like
Me, in other words.  There is always a famine of
activists who can spend a  lot of time studying the
enemy.  Because that is disgusting, and it hurts
your head.  You have to actually comprehend alien
ideas and revoltingly wrongheaded people who
are People Unlike You.

On the other hand, a good Opposition Research guy
has effects that are way, way out of proportion to
the scale of that endeavor.  That is a rare political skill.
You don't need any political charisma or organizational
skill to pull that one off, either.  You can become a real hornet.

If you're up for it, good luck with that.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #57 of 111: nape fest (zorca) Fri 10 Jan 03 18:04

    
thanks. nice take on fame distorting the message.

being a decent citizen is hard enough these days. but daring to be a
candidate is REALLY daunting. you wrote, "It's like having one's candidates
ritually beaten to death by brooms." which is funny and terrifying at the
same time.

i wonder if we won't reach a point where, almost like a dynamic
parliamentary system, the reins of power will be a function of constant
polling. gwb's in today. tomorrow, the hulk!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #58 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 10 Jan 03 19:59

    
I find myself wondering if power has any reins, as such, given the 
complex forces at work in the world. The reins were tossed off and 
trampled, the horse is on a rampage!

I was riding a horse that nearly fell not long ago, while galloping a 
slippery slope (not a metaphor, a REAL slippery slope!) in the rain, and 
the reins weren't doing me much good at that point.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #59 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 03 12:54

    
Well, nothing lately has been quite as
blatantly wild and insane as the Monica Lewinsky
scheme, but the Trent Lott decapitation
still proves than moral panic has all
the  punch it used to have.

Interesting that we have advanced to the
point where Republicans dare to use it
to trim their own ranks.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #60 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 03 13:48

    
I was just looking at the S.A.F.E. page you blogged today. It was making me 
dizzy. I guess Homeland Security will be big business... but somehow those 
guys don't make me feel any safer?

Time Magazine did an online poll a couple of days ago asking which of three 
or four nations is most dangerous to world security... the U.S. won hands 
down. 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #61 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 11 Jan 03 15:12

    
I just got my first copy of "Homeland Protection Professional,"
and I can already tell that it's going to become one of my
favorite publications.
http://www.hppmag.com/

I know it's modish to wring  our hands over the idea that
the USA has gone militarily bonkers, but the USA is only 6 percent of
the planet's population.   It may be that if the USA
becomes sufficiently aberrant, everyone else will get
their ducks in a row.  At least, they'll have means,
motive and opportunity.

Then the USA can stop being the world's policeman.
It can go back to being the world's tequila-addled
pro-league bowler, or the world's acerbic, bipolar
comedian -- you know, something more inherently
suited to the national character.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #62 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 11 Jan 03 17:06

    
I'm looking at their subscription page at 
http://www.emaildelivery.net/HPP/HPP.asp

When you subscribed, how did you identify yourself? Hazmat Coordinator? 
Risk manager?

You had a good point in our section on 'The Soldier': "Terror can 
destabilize, it can drive order away, but terror can't govern." Maybe the 
real point is that terrorism isn't meant to scale. We haven't seen a repeat 
attack of the magnitude of those on 9/11/2001, and I get the sense they're 
not really looking for a repeat performance, despite all the warnings we've 
heard. The terrorists must realize that escalation would be ruinous.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #63 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 03 07:51

    

If I recall, I identified myself as "contributing editor
of WIRED magazine," which is a kind of a handy thing
to be able to say, on occasion.

I think guys like Al-Qaida are perfectly aware that
escalation is ruinous.  They want to be theocratic
warlords and for that profession, ruin has its benefits.

This morning I was looking at Kevin Kelly's book
of travel photographs, ASIA GRACE.  It struck me
how many of these pictures look both pre-industrial
and post-apocalyptic.  It's a simple, devout, agrarian
life where Sharia law really would answer pretty much
any question you had.  The drawback is that you have
to live off a small flock of meat-bearing animals and
you probably die sometime before age 50.

But really, if you genuinely want to lead the kind of
life the Prophet did, winning a war can't help; only
genuine, general ruin could do that.  And we've got
surprising amounts of genuine, general ruin around.
I mean, how do you ruin Afghanistan *worse*?  You'd
really have to work at it.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #64 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 12 Jan 03 11:13

    
*I'm about to depart on the Tomorrow Now publicity
tour and may have a little trouble logging on here,
unless there is Wi-Fi in all those planes and taxis.

bruces


Viridian Note 00357: Tomorrow Now Tour

Key concepts:
futurism, nonfiction books, publicity tours, Viridian Pope-Emperor 

Attention Conservation Notice:
The obligatory labor of stoking the starmaker machinery. 

My new nonfiction book "TOMORROW NOW: Envisioning the Next Fifty
Years" has just come out. It doesn't have one single mention of the
word "Viridian" in it, but boy is it Viridian.
http://www.well.com/conf/mirrorshades/

I'm taking on all comers at the Well's "inkwell" conference online.
http://www.well.com/

William Gibson's got a weblog now.
http://www.WilliamGibsonBooks.com/index.asp

Cory Doctorow has published his first science fiction novel, and he is
giving away copies online literally by the tens of thousands.
http://www.boingboing.net/
------------------------------------------------------------------------

I'm on a brief West Coast tour to support my new book. If geography
allows, come by and press the Papal flesh.

Seattle
Tuesday, January 14, 02002


3:45 pm
Third Place Books
17171 Bothell Way NE
Lake Forest Park, WA 98155

7:00 pm
Reading, Talk, & Signing
University Bookstore
4326 University Way NW
Seattle, WA 98105

San Francisco
Wednesday, January 15, 02002


12:30 pm
Reading, Talk, & Signing
Stacey's Books
581 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105

7:30 pm
Reading, Talk, & Signing
Cody's Books
2454 Telegraph Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94704


O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O
"GEE, I REALLY LIKE YOUR BOOKS,
ESPECIALLY THE EARLY, FUNNY ONES"
O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O O=c=O
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #65 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 12 Jan 03 20:58

    
Hope you can log in from hotels, if nothing else!

Taschen has the entire Kevin Kelly book online (and the page for the entire 
book is pretty nifty):
http://www.asiagrace.com/entirebook.php

We could become sadhus if things get really bad:
http://www.asiagrace.com/detail.php?i=166

When I interviewed Jim White of the University of Colorado for my global
warming piece in the Viridian Whole Earth, he said that an upgrade of all
the world's population to the standard of living we enjoy in the U.S. isn't
possible with the resources available. The typical U.S. citizen (for whom
the rest of the  world is just a shadow) doesn't get it, but to other 
countries, there must be a perception that our riches are sustained by 
their poverty, no? 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #66 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 13 Jan 03 15:46

    
I am indeed logging on from a hotel.

Logging on from a hotel is a pretty high standard
of living thing to do, but it you'd tried to explain
that activity to the Limits of Growth crowd in the 70s,
they'd have no idea what you were talking about.

I might feel an instinctive "hey yeah" if you argued
that the insane riches of the American upper class
are sustained by the relative luxury of the dwindling
American middle class, but, y'know, that's probably
one of those blinkered, parochial, American things.

I can tell you one thing for sure: there's no way
a population of nine billion or so is gonna be
sustained by preindustrial Asian goat-herding.
Those goats have an environmental impact
that is catastrophic.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #67 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 03 16:34

    
Yeah, but they make a tasty cabrito!

I'm beginning to think the U.S. will never attack Iraq, just pile a bunch 
of troops along the border and squeeze. Those troops could consume a hell 
of a lot of cabrito. There must be a solution in there somewhere.

Meanwhile scientists said today that the end of the world is relatively 
near (just a few billion years away), so we should appreciate what we've 
got. 
http://boston.com/dailynews/013/ascribe/_End_of_World_Has_Already_Begu%3A.shtm
l
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #68 of 111: Andrew Alden (alden) Mon 13 Jan 03 17:53

    
That's wonderful. Peter Ward, the co-author of that book in the link, cut
his teeth telling the S.F. Bay area about earthquake hazards. He seems to
have progressed to the ultimate catastrophe.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #69 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 13 Jan 03 18:13

    
"It's the end of the world as we know it,
 And I feel fine!"
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #70 of 111: nape fest (zorca) Mon 13 Jan 03 20:55

    
ha.

so, perhaps i'm just not paying attention to the, um, right prognosticators,
but it almost seems that despite the dire state of world affairs, we're
seeing fewer end-of-the-worlders getting regular airplay these days. dod you
have any feel for how doom cults are going to fare in the new future, bruce?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #71 of 111: proud to be flesh (emilyg) Tue 14 Jan 03 09:13

    


Hi, jon, bruce, and all; sorry to be joining the convo a little late.

I'm in the last chapter of Tomorrow Now; aren't you suggesting there, bruce,
that it's just /how/ the world will end that's changed, not the actual
forecasting thereof?

The Bomb is passe; now it's biowarfare?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #72 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 03 12:16

    

You know, those things don't "end the world."

A full-scale nuclear exchange between who heavily
armed superpowers might conceivably kill everybody,
but that is no longer a big likelihood and even
in retrospect I think that prospect was overblown.

What you get is a holocaust of unimaginable proportions.
Then next morning somebody still wakes up and
has to find breakfast.  And eventually some historian gets
to write something like, "Well, there were nine billion
of us, and now there are about 750 million of us.  And
'we' are no longer 'them,' because their world has
perished and now we must do our best to become us."

Clocks continue to tick and leaves still fall off
the calendar.  Infants are born who  have no emotional
attachment to the previous way of life.  It's sort
of soothing to us to think that "the world ends"
when everything we know and love is reduced to ashes,
but, you know, it just doesn't.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #73 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 14 Jan 03 12:19

    
Hey, this hotel has got a feeble little trickle
of T-mobile Wi-Fi.  I thought Seattle would
be saturated with this stuff.

Now that Steve Case has resigned, I feel so
sorry for him that I may actually KEEP this
AOL account.  That seems kind of touchingly
old-fashioned, really.  It's like feeding
the alligators at the zoo.

In an hour I've got to go to the Microsoft
campus.  Pray for me.

Soon, San Francisco beckons.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #74 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 03 12:37

    
Right! One of those prayers that ends...

   World without end,
   Amen.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #75 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 14 Jan 03 12:37

    
Instead of asking another contrived interview question, I await your report 
on the visit to Microsoft.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #76 of 111: proud to be flesh (emilyg) Tue 14 Jan 03 12:44

    

(Just to clarify, *I* know the world doesn't end.  I was paraphrasing
paraphrasing, which is always a risky thing to do.)
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #77 of 111: TOM GEORGOULIAS writes... (tnf) Tue 14 Jan 03 16:38

    


Yeah, if you didn't like our disagreements to your opinions on free
software, just wait till you get to hear them at the Borg HQ.  Maybe, if
you're lucky, you'll get to visit Microsoft Research and check out some
of the cool projects underway.
--
Tom Georgoulias
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #78 of 111: Grant Barnes (pyrus-malus) Wed 15 Jan 03 01:28

    
Mr. Sterling, I'd like your input. A few days ago I read Tomorrow Now,
and deeply enjoyed it- every chapter made me think about new
possibilities! Since then I've been reading your Viridian sites,
articles, well posts, and novel Zeitgeist, all of which I've found to
be cool and timely. Thank you for those. I'm in my first semester of
college, so I don't yet have practical technical expertise, but I do
have a general plan: I want to create highly stimulating learning
environments. I've found that I learn best when I'm on my computer
doing many things simultaneously, and research confirms that an ideal
learning environment is one in which visual, auditory, and kinesthetic
stimuli are coordinated. I know that even very young children who can't
or don't read can rapidly assimilate large amounts of information from
video games, analyze that data, and adapt instinctually. So I'd like
to see interactive, networked web sites that move as quickly as video
games and rapidly teach complex concepts, like physics, in an
instinctually tangible way. They might not even use words, rather
relying on the manipulation of objects to make concepts obvious. A more
speculative idea yet is to use visual, auditory, and kinesthetic
stimuli that change more rapidly than we can consciously perceive, but
communicate practical knowledge (how to drive or speak a language, for
instance) in some subliminal way. Do you think these are realistic
proposals? Do you know of anyone working on similar or complementary
ideas? Also, do you have your own site? I often see links to
brucesterling.com, but it seems to be down. 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #79 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 03 07:04

    
Well Grant, if I were you I'd be checking out
amusement-park design.  Cory Doctorow
could help you.

No there is no Bruce Sterling official worship site.
I'm just into a lot of stuff.

Uh-oh, the plane's boarding.

Check out this Wayport disclaimer.  New
frontiers in wi-fi paranoia.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #80 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 03 07:05

    
        
WAYPORT ACCEPTABLE USE POLICY

All users of Wayport's Internet services (the "Services") agree to and
must comply with this Acceptable Use Policy (AUP). Wayport does not
exercise editorial control or review over the content of any Web site,
electronic mail transmission, newsgroup, or other material created or
accessible over or through the Services. However, Wayport may remove,
block, filter, or restrict by any other means any materials that, in
Wayport's sole discretion, may be illegal, may subject Wayport to
liability, or which may violate this AUP. Wayport may cooperate with
legal authorities and/or third parties in the investigation of any
suspected or alleged crime or civil wrong. Violation of this AUP may
result in the suspension or termination of either access to the
Services and/or Wayport account or other actions as detailed below.
This AUP should be read in conjunction with our other policies all of
which are posted on our website at www.wayport.net. 

The following constitute violations of this AUP (this list is intended
to be illustrative and not exhaustive; other uses may violate the AUP
and Wayport remains the sole and final arbiter of acceptable usage of
its Services):

a.      Illegal use: Using the Services to transmit any material (by email,
uploading, posting, or otherwise) that, intentionally or
unintentionally, violates any applicable local, state, national or
international law, or any rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. 
b.      Harm to minors: Using the Services to harm, or attempt to harm,
minors in any way. 
c.      Threats: Using the Services to transmit any material (by email,
uploading, posting, or otherwise) that threatens or encourages bodily
harm or destruction of property.
d.      Harassment: Using the Services to transmit any material (by email,
uploading, posting, or otherwise) that harasses another.
e.      Fraudulent activity: Using the Services to make fraudulent offers
to sell or buy products, items, or services or to advance any type of
financial scam such as "pyramid schemes," "Ponzi schemes", unregistered
sales of securities, securities fraud and "chain letters."
f.      Forgery or impersonation: Adding, removing or modifying identifying
network, message, or article header information in an effort to
deceive or mislead is prohibited. Attempting to impersonate any person
by using forged headers or other identifying information is prohibited.
The use of anonymous remailers or nicknames does not constitute
impersonation.
g.      Unsolicited commercial email/Unsolicited bulk email: Using the
Services to transmit any unsolicited commercial email or unsolicited
bulk email. Activities that have the effect of facilitating unsolicited
commercial email or unsolicited bulk email, whether or not that email
is commercial in nature, are prohibited. Using deliberately misleading
headers in e-mails sent to multiple parties is prohibited
h.      Unauthorized access: Using the Services to access, or to attempt to
access, the accounts of others, or to penetrate, or attempt to
penetrate, security measures of Wayport's or another entity's computer
software or hardware, electronic communications system, or
telecommunications system, whether or not the intrusion results in
disruption of service or the corruption or loss of data.
i.      Copyright or trademark infringement: Using the Services to transmit
any material (by email, uploading, posting, or otherwise) that
infringes any copyright, trademark, patent, trade secret, or other
proprietary rights of any third party, including, but not limited to,
the unauthorized copying of copyrighted material, the digitization and
distribution of photographs from magazines, books, or other copyrighted
sources, and the unauthorized transmittal of copyrighted software.
j.      Collection of personal data: Using the Services to collect, or
attempt to collect, personal information about third parties without
their knowledge or consent.
k.      Reselling the services: Reselling the Services without Wayport's
authorization.
l.      Network disruptions and unfriendly activity: Using the Services for
any activity which adversely affects the ability of other people or
systems to use Wayport Services or the Internet. This includes
excessive consumption of network or system resources whether
intentional or unintentional. This also includes "denial of service"
(DoS) attacks against another network host or individual user.
Interference with or disruption of other network users, network
services or network equipment is prohibited. It is the users's
responsibility to ensure that their system is configured, operated, and
used in a manner to avoid excessive consumption of network or system
resources. It is the users's responsibility to ensure that their system
is configured in a secure manner. A user may not, through action or
inaction, allow others to use their system for illegal or inappropriate
actions. A user may not permit their system, through action or
inaction, to be configured in such a way that gives a third party the
capability to use their system in an illegal or inappropriate manner.
m.      News: Wayport users should use their best judgment when posting to
any newsgroup. Many newsgroups have charters, published guidelines,
FAQs, or "community standards" describing what is and is not considered
appropriate. USENET can be a valuable resource if used properly. The
continued posting of off-topic articles is prohibited. Commercial
advertisements are off-topic in most newsgroups, especially regional
groups not specifically named for such. The presence of such articles
in a group is not indicative of the group's "intended" use. Please be
familiar with basic USENET "netiquette" before posting to a newsgroup.
n.      High Volume, Server Hosting, and non-traditional end user
activities: The Services are intended for an end user's periodic active
use of email, instant messaging, browsing the World Wide Web, and
other typical end user activities. High volume data transfers,
especially sustained high volume data transfers, are prohibited.
Hosting a web server, IRC server, or any other server is prohibited.
Accordingly, Wayport maintains the right to terminate any user's
connection following the detection of any high volume data transfer,
server hosting, or non-traditional end user activity as determined by
Wayport.


Wayport requests that anyone who believes that there is a violation of
this AUP direct the information to: aup-watchdog@Wayport.net. 

If available, please provide the following information: 

*       The IP address used to commit the alleged violation 
*       The date and time of the alleged violation, including the time zone
or offset from GMT 
*       Evidence of the alleged violation 

When reporting an issue regarding unsolicited email please provide a
copy of the email messages with full headers which typically provides
all of the above data. Other situations will require different methods
of providing the necessary information.

Wayport may take any one or more of the following actions, or other
actions not listed, at Wayport's sole discretion in response to
complaints:

*       issue warnings: written or verbal 
*       suspend the Member's account 
*       terminate the Member's account 
*       bill the user for administrative costs and/or reactivation charges,
with a minimum administrative cost, if assessed, of $250 per incident 
*       bring legal action to enjoin violations and/or to collect damages,
if any, caused by violations. 

Wayport reserves the right to revise, amend, or modify this AUP, and
our other policies and agreements at any time and in any manner. Notice
of any revision, amendment, or modification will be posted on
Wayport's website and will be effective as to existing users 30 days
after posting same.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #81 of 111: Jack King (gjk) Wed 15 Jan 03 07:40

    

Actually, that looks pretty standard.  The First Amendment ends at the other
end of your modem.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #82 of 111: Jack King (gjk) Wed 15 Jan 03 07:45

    

Another way to put that is, "Freedom of the Press belongs to those who own a
printing press."  If you want to exercise your First Amendment right in
cyberspace, you've got to set up your own ISP.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #83 of 111: Brian Dear (brian) Wed 15 Jan 03 09:24

    <scribbled by brian Wed 20 Mar 13 18:15>
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #84 of 111: Jack King (gjk) Wed 15 Jan 03 09:40

    

Ha, I'll take that case.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #85 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 03 11:09

    
Clap the handcuffs on me, I'm ready to face the music.

Besides, those Wayport guys are based in Austin.
I know where they live.

I have now arrived in WELL-land.  Soon, radio and
bookstore appearances.  Oh the unbounded joy...
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #86 of 111: Gail Williams (gail) Wed 15 Jan 03 12:21

    
What, no WELLfolk introduced themselves in Seattle?  What a pity. OK, 
I found the info from above someplace, and here's the scoop on the SF
events today:

 12:30 pm
 Reading, Talk, & Signing
 Stacey's Books
 581 Market Street
 San Francisco, CA 94105

On one hand, that's only a few blocks from here.  On the other, tonight 
might be more lively, though for me consumption of gasoline may be 
involved:

 7:30 pm
 Reading, Talk, & Signing
 Cody's Books
 2454 Telegraph Avenue
 Berkeley, CA 94704
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #87 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Wed 15 Jan 03 13:26

    
Big whacks of that AUP are aimed at complying with the requirements for
gaining the safe harbors of the DMCA and the CDA.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #88 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 03 14:04

    
Definitely.

Thought I'd mention the Eldred vs Ashcroft decision, which sustained 
copyright extension (and perhaps invited more of the same). Web pages are 
turning black (nods to Cory) in mourning for the public domain. The mouse 
is still in chains.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #89 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 15 Jan 03 16:27

    
He's Mouse Zedong.

History stops dead with the creation of a cartoon mouse
on a tabletop in Kansas City.

Think of a Mickey Mouse boot stamping on a human face forever.

Great promotion for the rollout of "Down and Out in the Magic
Kingdom," Cory.  Man, who sez sci-fi writers can't
predict the future.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #90 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Wed 15 Jan 03 19:18

    
Heh, thanks, Bruce. 40,000+ downloads and counting!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #91 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 15 Jan 03 19:51

    
Wow, at 25.95 a copy, that would be $1,038,000.00! I wonder if you can 
write that off, Cory?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #92 of 111: nape fest (zorca) Wed 15 Jan 03 22:31

    
at bruce's reading today, he said the nicest things about cory and
boingboing.net. all deserved, of course.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #93 of 111: J (jacob) Wed 15 Jan 03 23:01

    <scribbled by jacob Wed 15 Jan 03 23:02>
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #94 of 111: (jacob) Wed 15 Jan 03 23:05

    

He did!  He also signed my antique, falling-apart copy of Involution
Ocean.  ("Are you sure you want me to sign this?  This is one of the rare
unsigned copies.")

Excellent reading & questions, highly recommended, etc etc.  Even the
pet-subject questions got steered to something interesting, not to mention
funny.

Also, as zorca said afterward, I will be hearing the book in that wry voice
when I re-read it.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #95 of 111: Martha Soukup (soukup) Thu 16 Jan 03 00:45

    
E-mail from Tom Georgulias:

Just to throw another log on the fire, the ACLU released a report
stating that a total surveillance society is a realistic possibility
now.  I'm not sure whether to laugh or cry about this, but part of that
report said that the only thing really holding back progress in total
surveillance is incompetence.  This has been a terrible week for digital
rights...

It's also more proof of the importance of staying technologically adept
and pushing yourself to constantly learn new things, which is one of the
reasons I liked "The Student" so much.  It hit home for me.

Cory, increment your count by another +2.  I photocopied my pdf
printouts for a couple of friends who didn't download it.  ;)
--
Tom Georgoulias
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #96 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Thu 16 Jan 03 07:16

    
<scuffing toe>

Good on ya, Tom!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #97 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 03 07:25

    
$1,038,051.90
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #98 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 16 Jan 03 07:53

    
Back on the plane  later today for a hasty return
to Berkeley-on-the-Colorado.

It's really interesting to see IP issues getting
headlines day after day.   The Mouse by nature needs
to live quietly in the darkness behind the baseboards,
nibbling his IP cheese.  He's gonna have a hard
time being both the cuddly kid-toy icon and the
Brutal Yellow-Fanged Giant Thief Rat That
Liberals and Librarians Hate.

In the authorial "business" model, it's all about
the notoriety.  Authors aren't capitalists, and the
cash would just blow right out the window anyhow.
"Oh look honey!  $1,038,051!  Quick, let's go
to Istanbul!"  It's vastly more important and useful
to achieve some fame and cultural standing.

I wasn't mistaken when I said that "science fiction
needs Cory Doctorow."  This cool stunt Cory pulled
with his so-called "book" is an act of blatant countercultural
daring that is revitalizing our scene. It's not just
some weird gesture -- in the Eldred context this is
a weird gesture that *fucking matters.*  

And it was timed brilliantly.  SF is genuinely
politically relevant again.  It is in a position
to say things that genuinely hurt people's
feelings by spelling out the unspeakable
in terms that cannot be denied.

Oh brother!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #99 of 111: Life in the big (doctorow) Thu 16 Jan 03 09:05

    
Bruce, that's mighty kind of you. The debate has been one-sided for far too
long, I think.

BTW, the story I workshopped at your place is up on Salon this morning, and
it's got a new title, "Liberation Spectrum."

http://www.salon.com/tech/feature/2003/01/16/liberation_spectrum/index.html
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #100 of 111: proud to be flesh (emilyg) Thu 16 Jan 03 09:25

    


Years from now, Cory's soul (sold in order to insure the great timing that
launched his novel) will appear on eBay.  It will ultimately sell for
X, where X=((22.95-various discounts*number of discounted books
sold)+(22.95*(total downloads + total full-price copies sold)).
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #101 of 111: Charlie Stross (charlie-stross) Thu 16 Jan 03 13:10

    
Seriously, there is stuff bubbling up from under about the whole IP
situation. What Baen Books have been doing with their free library has
been getting attention; I was ranting about this at ConJose, and there
in the audience was a certain editor from Tor, nodding like his head
was about to fall off. (And it wasn't Cory's editor, either.)

Here's a prediction: the big media conglomerates that own the music
and film companies that are members of the RIAA and MPAA *also* own
lots of book and magazine publishers. And the guys who deal in text are
a lot more laid back than Hilary Rosen and friends would like. Sooner
rather than later the whole DRM and open content controversy is going
to stop being [huge corporate goliaths] vs. [the rest of us] and turn
into an internal boardroom fight over what IP policy the media
corporations ought to take. At which point, Cory and friends (I include
myself here, if you don't mind) are going to find allies behind what
were formerly the enemy barricades.

In the long term, of course, the only way to *really* secure
intellectual property is to come up with a means of selective memory
erasure. But that's a whole 'nother can of worms ...

Bruce: if Cory did not exist, would you feel it necessary to invent
him?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #102 of 111: Martha Soukup (soukup) Thu 16 Jan 03 17:04

    
E-mail from J. M. Brenner:

I caught your reading at Stacey's in SF yesterday, and
I'm afraid that while the Q&A period struck me as vintage
Sterling, I'm afraid that the paean to your cell phone
didn't go over that well with me.

The dark side of cell phones is that they appear to be
astoundingly addictive for some people, to the point that
they regularly risk their lives to go driving around
chatting on them, with that distinctive cell-phone user
look: eyes glazed over, grinning to themselves, cruising on
auto-pilot.  I used to try and make "hang it up" gestures at
these people, but it's no use: they can't see you.

What data there is on the subject shows that this behavior
is "as dangerous as drunk driving", but these people either
haven't gotten the word, or are engaging in some serious
denial.

So for you, "cell phones" are symbols of being connected,
but for me they're a sign of being dangerously disconnected.

And further, I think it's pretty demonstrable that
increasing connectivity is not *always* a good idea.
c.f. Kevin Kelley's reporting on "Kauffman's Law" in Chapter
20 of "Out of Control".

This is a point that seems intuitively obvious to me,
because I've worked at jobs that were nearly impossible to
do because of the extreme quantity of internal email you
needed to read.  (It isn't so much "the guy who reads the
most email won't be fired" it's more like "the guy who reads
the most email should really get the hell out of there.")
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #103 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 03 18:31

    <scribbled by jonl Thu 16 Jan 03 19:19>
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #104 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 03 19:21

    
It's the guy who SENDS the most email that gets fired!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #105 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 16 Jan 03 19:29

    
Tomorrow is the last *official* day for this interview, but of course
everybody's welcome to hang out here until 2012 or the end of history,
whichever comes first. Meanwhile everybody should drop by here and jam
tomorrow, we'll party like it's 1999.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #106 of 111: Martha Soukup (soukup) Thu 16 Jan 03 20:59

    
E-mail from Tom Georgoulias:

Or someone will just paypal their whole family's whuffie to buy it, then
put copies of Cory's soul on a P2P net to try and get their whuffie back
up.

I read that Bruce will be at BookPeople in Austin, TX on Tuesday, Jan
21st, at 7:00PM.  Is that the end of the book tour?
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #107 of 111: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 17 Jan 03 07:01

    
Now back home.  Whew.

After three days of ceaseless ranting and
charisma hemorrhage, I am pitifully hoarse and
afflicted with a bad cold.  I probably got it off that
cellphone I borrowed.  They SPREAD GERMS
you know.  The microwaves COOK YOUR BRAIN
AND YOUR EYEBALLS, too.

My, am I ever feeling my futurist 21st-century age
today.  I'm gray haired and middle-aged and feeble
and so, so respectable.  I'll just be tottering along now,
tomorrow-now trending rapidly toward yesterday-then.
Somewhere, a nice chrome and matte-black
cyber-walker awaits me.

Charles Stross and Cory Doctorow are here.
You must listen to these younger folk,
ladies and gentlemen.  They've got a lot on
their minds.

Adios.
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #108 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 03 10:48

    
It's like Massumi says, "Yearning is a tendency without end; it is
unexpiring, unself-consuming. It is a supplementarity of paradoxical
movements, a kind of excess that is neither being nor surplus-value, an
excess that can neither be identified or calculated, even fleetingly, let
alone purchased or accumulated--that can be only embodied. Becoming is
virtuality detached from the universality of capitalized specification and
returned to the body as local site of global deviation. It is the exemplary
incarnation of singularizing excess. Becoming is the temporality of the
future-past woven into a de-ontology of the unworkable: the pragmatics of
postcapitalist affectivity."

And Burroughs: "Cry of newborn baby gurgles into death rattle and the 
crystal skull. THAT IS WHAT YOU GET FOR FUCKING."

Adios!
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #109 of 111: Berliner (captward) Fri 17 Jan 03 11:01

    
Elvis has left the building. 
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #110 of 111: Grant Barnes (pyrus-malus) Fri 17 Jan 03 11:48

    
re: 108: ??
  

inkwell.vue.171 : Bruce Sterling: Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next 50 Years
permalink #111 of 111: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 17 Jan 03 16:03

    
Heh. Pomo detritus.
  

