inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #0 of 250: Introduction /1 (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 21 10:20

    
This is our 20th annual State of the World conversation.  The longer
we go, the weirder the world gets! SOTW 2021 promises to be the
weirdest yet, with the world evolving along the lines of the most
extreme cyberpunk fever dreams.

Every year this conversation is hosted by the WELL, an online
community that started as a BBS and has been around for 35 years.
You can learn all about the WELL via Wikipedia:
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_WELL>

The annual State of the World event is a showcase for the WELL: if
you want to have conversations like this every day, consider joining
<https://www.well.com/join/>.  Its long form conversations are a
welcome change from drive-by posting on systems like Facebook and
Twitter. Most conversations on the WELL are available to members
only, but we're having this conversation in a special part of the
WELL, called Inkwell.vue, that was set up for public conversation.

For an idea what's in store over the next two weeks, here are links
to the last three "State of the World" conversations:
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/507/State-of-the-World-2020-Br
uce-St-page01.html>
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/506/State-of-the-World-2019-pa
ge01.html>
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/503/State-of-the-World-2018-Br
uce-St-page01.html>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #1 of 250: Introduction /2 (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 21 10:31

    
If you're not a member of the WELL and want to add a comment or
question here, just send via email to inkwell at well.com - include
"state of the world" or "SOTW" in the subject of the message.

Bruce Sterling, Malka Older, and I will be posting our observations
and having a conversation here for two weeks (January 5-18) - so if
you find it interesting, keep coming back. Other members of the WELL
will also be posting here, and anyone reading can send a comment or
question as noted above.

Who's posting:

Bruce Sterling (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Sterling) is a 
futurist, journalist, science-fiction author and design critic. He's
written many science fiction novels including his seminal work on
the Mirrorshades anthology, which defined the cyberpunk genre. 

Jon Lebkowsky is a digital culture maven, podcaster, writer, and
dabbler in strategic foresight thinking. He cohosts the Plutopia
podcast (https://plutopia.io), weekly livestream, and Radio Free
Plutopia show. He's been a member of the WELL, and a host of WELL
conversations, for almost three decades.

Our special guest Malka Older is a writer, aid worker, and
sociologist. Her science-fiction political
thriller _Infomocracy_ was named one of the best books of 2016 by
Kirkus, Book Riot, and the Washington Post. She is the creator of
the serial "Ninth Step Station," currently running on Serial Box,
and her short story collection _And Other Disasters_ came out in
November 2019. She is a Faculty Associate at Arizona State
University’s School for the Future of Innovation in Society and her
opinions can be found in The New York Times, The Nation, Foreign
Policy, and NBC THINK, among other places.

And, as mentioned above, members of the WELL will likely be adding
their thoughts, and others who send comments or questions via email.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #2 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 2 Jan 21 15:14

    
Just speaking for myself, not for Bruce or Malka, I want to include
this disclaimer...

Our contemporary media reality is a world of opinions, and opinions
of opinions. Our media sense organs are clogged with the cruft of
opinion, we hear little else.  Factual accounts are occluded by
excess of interpretation. 

Like everyone, my sense of the state of the world depends on what I
perceive through intermediaries.  My sense of reality is inevitably
distorted, especially as I'm sheltering in place and depending more
than ever on media for access to the world. 

So I encourage you to take my  "state of the world" observations
with a block of salt. The experiences I can best and most accurately
describe are daily life experiences on the home front, with
occasional forays into the surrounding environment - walking around
the 'hood, or driving around the city, rarely stopping to enter a
store. Other than that, there are virtual social experiences via
platforms like Zoom - I have plenty of those.  
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #3 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Mon 4 Jan 21 03:45

    
I appreciate that caveat, because when I think about the
proliferation and apparent seductiveness of disinformation- surely
an ongoing theme that is likely to continue into the new year -I
think about the levels of abstraction in the areas of knowledge we
are expected to deal with. To take one example, we are all expected
to make decisions (vote) or at a minimum hold opinions about "the
economy"; and yet, there is literally no way to know anything about
the national economy first-hand, and even if you are a trained
economist with access to "the data", that data itself is limited and
largely made up of proxies for other, uncollectable data and its
interpretation is contested. Even before we became varying degrees
of shut-ins, our sense of those larger or distant or invisible or
complicated "realities" - epidemiology, the personalities of
politicians, the intentions of nation-states, the environment - have
always been heavily mediated. 

I'm not saying that we can't form opinions - that would make this a
very short conversation. But while I ask you to add the same block
of salt to my observations, I'm suggesting that the levels of
abstract and specialized knowledge required for participation in the
world are setting some high expectations. A time-limited experience
of being confined and local may work as a metaphor to help us see
that. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #4 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 4 Jan 21 09:40

    
I made a top ten list of subjects or conditions that have been on my
radar as 2020 was accelerating for its collision with 2021 (I'm not
sure who got the ticket).  Ten became eleven. I'm posting that list
here, and I expect to post more about each of these over the next
two weeks (but I'm also waiting to see what Bruce and Malka get
into).

1. Effects of global pandemic, including relation to climate crisis
(Zoonotic diseases), supply chain disruption, changes in cities,
virtualization of work and social connection, and politicization of
public health.

2. Political manifestation of cult craziness (Trumpism, Q Anon)

3. Fragmented philosophical conversations about sensemaking via
frameworks like GameB; the potentially visionary hashed with the
idealistic and speculative.

4. Fake news, and related confusion about cultural authority, 
including authority for the social construction of reality.

5. Re-enchantment/intimacy with nature .

6. Tech industry/'stacks'/monopoly (business)/monopoly (attention).
Leasing our perceptual apparatus to social media companies in
exchange for payment in dopamine and free access to blather.

7. Robot revolution: automation vs human labor. Related question: 
what's driving the economy when consumers can't consume?

8. Science denial: Ascendance of challenges to scientific method and
practice. Denigration of expertise. Ascendant anti-intellectualism. 

9. Cyberwar; global tension, destablilization, confusion and and
unrest.

10. Governance crisis in the US and elsewhere. Emergence of
autocratic movements. Challenges to democracy. ("It always happens."
- Adam Gopnik in The New Yorker).

11. Race/BLM/equality & justice. Also related on the dark side:
political correctness, woke ideology, cancel culture.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #5 of 250: Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation. (af) Mon 4 Jan 21 21:46

    
TFTP

Thanks for the Pseud

"Pseud" is the part of the heading that shows before your user name
-- in my case 
 <af>

It's regarded as a well honour (yes, British spelling) to adopt
someone's comments as a pseud.

If you are ON the well you can click on the <af> and it will tell
you who I really, really am -- no anonymity here.

In real life : Alan Fletcher
Member since : April 29, 1997 (Actually, a bit before that under a
different ID)

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - 
I've lurked (read, but not posted) in your SOTW for many a long
year. and look forward to a  brand (pun) new, hopefully brilliant
(another pun) contributor, Malka. In latin, I'd guess female ... 
but on the well, nobody knows you are a god.
-- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Meanwhile ... back to the show!
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #6 of 250: Never were the way she was (jet) Mon 4 Jan 21 22:31

    
> 2. Political manifestation of cult craziness (Trumpism, Q Anon)

I call poltical party foul.  There are no groups left of center that
have "cult craziness"?

How about Greens who still support Jill Stein after she met with Putin
in the same dinner with Michael Flynn?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #7 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Mon 4 Jan 21 22:55

    
> Malka. In latin, I'd guess female ...  but on the well, nobody
knows you are a god.

I didn't read the intros carefully enough : Missed a personal
pronoun!

> Our special guest Malka Older is a writer, aid worker, and
sociologist. **Her** science-fiction political thriller
_Infomocracy_ 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #8 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Mon 4 Jan 21 23:27

    
> 4. Fake news, and related confusion about cultural authority, 
including authority for the social construction of reality.

I have a special interest in that one.

Bunk, de-bunk- de-de-bunk ... meta-bunk
(dang! Just today I read a debunking analysis. Might have been cdc,
but I can't find it)

On the well I've been insulted as a 'contrarian' ... 
A Contrarian since 1966 and proud of it! 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #9 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 03:54

    
Chinese Year of the Ox, MMXXI!

I take deep comfort in the two-decade continuity of this State of
the World assessment.  I have few other rituals that are so
long-standing, and also not somehow quarantined now.

I doubt we'll have much thematic trouble this year: the State of the
World is best described as "diseased."  There's a huge pandemic well
under way, and if you're looking for the major change driver in
world affairs, that disaster is pretty much it.

The year 2021 is not merely about the Rona, but the Rona's
implications will touch everything and everybody.  Adversity is 
revealing of character, and nine months of world plague to date have
been revelatory.

Once again the start of a year finds me in Ibiza.  
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #10 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 03:58

    

In other years that were devoid of major epidemics,  the wife and I
were often flitting out of a small apartment in Ibiza; we could be
on and off the island in a matter of hours.

But nowadays -- like a lot of other families during pandemic --
we're in a multigenerational household.  We occupy a larger Ibizan
house, with the Texan guy, the Italian guy, the Serbian Mom, the
Serbian Grandmother, and also -- the Tiny Spaniard.

The Tiny Spaniard is the new MMXXI arrival on the scene -- for she
was born in 2020.  Now three months old, the Tiny Spaniard (an Ibiza
native) -- instantiates futurity.  Although the Tiny Spaniard is
often fretful, life for everybody else around the Tiny Spaniard is
less fretful and more focussed.  Her cogent demands for attention
realign everybody else's priorities; everybody always has somebody
cogent to talk about; even though nobody's got much of a job, to
speak of, our expenses are pretty low;  so the epidemic has doubled
as an extensive parental leave.

Whatever income we have is pooled because we share the same roof,
eat the same meals and no one travels.  So it's a contemplative
life, slow-paced, intimate and oddly rural. An Ibiza devoid of
tourists is well-nigh depopulated -- we even sometimes gather fruit
and eat wild-caught fish.

If there were any economic justice in the world, I'd likely be
starving to death at the moment, because I'm scarcely doing anything
that would qualify as  my "labor."   I don't travel consult, speak,
teach, or even publish much.  Europe's in a cultural blackout;
movement's as restricted as life in the Warsaw Pact.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #11 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:02

    

Even the discos of Ibiza, some of the world's biggest, have been
shuttered for months and have the affect of slumbering dragons.

This is truly one of the strangest episodes of my lifetime, and it
compares best with long-distant idle summers that I used to spend,
as a schoolchild, with my grandparents on their rural Texan farms. 
I happen to be playing the grandparent at this cycle of the
generations, but my life has regained that modest, slow-paced
feeling of rural Texans who were veterans of a major Depression. 
They didn't have fancy electric appliances or any Internet, but
there was a similar ruminative feeling of each new day being much
the last, with gathering and preparing food being the focus of
family life, and not a lot of hairy-eyed talk about exponential
trends or explosive Singularities.

So it's rather a cud-chewing Year of the Ox idyll here, and I
wouldn't complain about my privileged and cozy lot amid difficult
circumstances, except that there's so much illness and death on my
screen.  Every day the Rona empties a shotgun at my extensive flock
of global acquaintances; a few are dead, but many, many sick;
reality is full of buckshot holes, and I'm direly aware that the
course of this year will have more, and more, and more of that great
and sublimely awful trend.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #12 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:05

    

It interests me that the major change-drivers of this decade are
illness and political upheaval.  I've read a lot about earlier eras
of history in which that was so, but the reflex of my contemporaries
is that such matters should  all be subsumed by technological
advance.

Now life is indeed subsumed by technology -- Big Tech is saving
lives because it enables so much social distancing -- but nobody
construes that as "advancement."  On the contrary, a lot of these
seemingly all-potent trends are now dismissed as "bullshit," or
disinformation, or noise, or deceit, or oppressive surveillance.

I'd like to list some of this "bullshit," from some of the venture
capitalists I follow on Twitter.  I think they're being morbid and
cynical here, because hustling rich guys are just as shell-shocked
by plague as everybody else, but I think it's illustrative of the
new social tone.  

Practically every one of these things has been valorized in WIRED
magazine and in stock-investment pitches; so, if they're bullshit
they've been exceedingly profitable.  It's true that most big cool
ideas get debased into wooden-nickel cliches for motivational
speakers, but in our year MMXXI there really AREN'T any motivational
speakers left.   They're not around to prime the pumps.   "Come to
my TED Talk and catch Covid-19," that's not an appealing elevator
pitch.

Most every one of these bullshit ideas could have motivated an
interesting, crowd-pleasing panel at South By South West
Interactive.  However, when the great halls are deserted, even the
hottest techno club banger anthem sounds hollow.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #13 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:06

    
So I'll list them, and you can taste these stale buzzwords on your
tongue here and wonder, "hey yeah, where did their sense-of-wonder
go?"  Well, MMXXI can be understood as a year in which those
concepts have lost their charmedl life;  for that's indeed how we
used to live, but that's not life as it is in the Year of the Ox. 
History is not just about new things but also the absences of old
things.


Thinking about a list of terms that tell you the speaker is almost
certainly bullshitting."

AI
5G
Smart city
IoT
Surveillance capitalism

Singularity 
Big Data 
Exponential 
Orthogonal
VR AR XR MR 
Digital Transformation 

the Spotify of ... the Netflix of ...
Content is King
Neoliberalism ruined  ... 
Synergy
Disrupting the industry 
Mobility As a Service 
4th Industrial Revolution
Sustainable, Equitable, Inclusive
Machine Learning
Customer first Customer centric Customer experience
Omnichannel
agile lean 
Paradigm 
Future-proof 
Seamlessly
Cloud as an Innovation Platform
Responsible AI
Edge Computing
Nanotechnology 
Machine Learning
Quantum anything
Uberization 
 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #14 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:13

    

Okay, if all that variegated stuff is "bullshit," then practically
every corral on the Electronic Frontier has been full of bullshit
for forty years.   What we're seeing here is a loss of happy
aspiration and the glum imposition of Big Tech consolidation.

It's not "bullshit" when Jeff Bezos gets all the money when people
can't talk to each other.  Events have played into Jeff's hands, and
every world-busting scheme he's ever tried has been decried as
"bullshit" by some Industry nay-sayers -- that dismissal is why he
wins.

But what's significant for MMXXI is that Jack Ma, who is head of
Alibaba and therefore Jeff's Chinese twin, got abducted and vanished
by the Chinese secret police.  Jack Ma is the first Big Tech mogul,
the first grandee from "Google Apple Facebook Amazon Microsoft Baidu
Alibaba Tencent," to be directly repressed by state-sponsored
trenchcoats and guns.  This guy was Mr Chinese Tech-Dream, too --
nobody ladled out the Moore's Law gung-ho we-can-do-it like Jack Ma
did.

Commentators are comparing Jack Ma to Mikhail Khodorkovsky, whose
arrest by Putin marked the sudden end of the post-Soviet freebooter
oligarchs and the sudden, icy domination of the Putin "siloviki" spy
regime.  But I think it makes more sense to compare Jack Ma directly
to Jeff Bezos.  Because Jack Ma was no mere finance hustler and
paper-shuffling privateer like Khodorkovsky; Ma really was a
technical innovator and it was the threat posed by his innovations
that led to his abduction.

Ma was actually abducted by the Party for much the same reason that
Huawei Princess Meng Wanzhou was near-abducted by the Trump
Administration -- the plan here was to put a spoke through the
wheels of Chinese tech "advance."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #15 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:16

    
So even though Big Tech blatantly dominates daily life, and is far
outstripping Big Oil and other Big rivals in revenue, their charming
ideology is collapsing and they've never been so directly
imperilled.   The Chinese-US trade war now is about hacking and
screwing up the other guy's tech supply chain; just, befouling his
high-tech gizmos to the point where he can't make 'em or nobody
trusts 'em or uses them.

So I follow developments there with particular interest.  "When
elephants fight the grass gets trampled," so if you're a lean and
agile little player like say Estonia or Dubai, your life gets a lot
more cramped and hazardous when state-supported half-spooks are
wrecking your networks and Great-Walling your global markets.  The
extent of the damage is hidden by the fact that we've also got
quarantines, so if you're Estonia or Dubai you're also in the
ox-like slumber of global Ibiza.  But that plague might lift, while
Xi Jinping's determination to turn the Middle Kingdom into a giant
autonomous Xinjiang Galapagos is another geopolitical matter.

I don't like to sound too monotone about this.  It truly interests
me, and even inspires and uplifts me, to see the 2020s as so
entirely and unexpected different, so off the apparent historic
trend-line.  Normally social change starts within niches and filters
out, but the Rona's so swift and universal that it makes Moore's Law
look irrelevant; it's a profound change in lived experience that
affects everybody from tot to granny.

Even heads of state are sick; maybe even, especially the heads of
state.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #16 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:24

    
> 5. Re-enchantment/intimacy with nature .

While I'm sure there's some direct re-engagement going on, I'm also
reminded by artifacts like this:
https://www.cnet.com/news/make-lego-bonsai-trees-flower-bouquets-to-relax-with
-new-botanical-series/
about how the Victorians became fascinated with taxidermy as they
became more urbanized and industrialized and farther from living
nature.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #17 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Tue 5 Jan 21 04:54

    
If a lot of Big Tech is starting to lose its conjuring power, there
is one technology that manages to be both hype and, to some, fake
news: the vaccine(s). Grateful as I am for the incredible effort
that went in to accomplishing the vaccines so quickly, my concern
for the coming year and beyond is how the story is being rewritten
into a fable that our technological prowess omnia vincit. It might
be hard to imagine now that the history of the pandemic could be
turned into a triumphant narrative of human control over nature, but
lost battles have been transformed into glorious conquest before.
Already some are losing sight of the failures in organization, in
humanity, in preparedness that have made the vaccine glow like a
grail. 
This is unlikely to be the only challenge we see in the coming
decade, or the coming year, that can be solved more easily, quickly,
and cheaply through changing human behavior and which we prefer to
attack using money and technology. The climate crisis leaps to mind.
I hope that we can engrave some of the lessons of this past year
into our collective consciousness, but I have little confidence that
they will function any better than the Japanese stones warning "Do
Not Build Below This Point" that became so celebrated after the
tsunami hit.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #18 of 250: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 21 07:23

    
For our readers:

"State of the World 2021" is a discussion hosted by the WELL, an
online community with a 35 year history, still active with in-depth
conversations about myriad subjects. If you're interested in
becoming a member, learn more at <https://www.well.com/about-2/>. 

Most WELL conversations require membership, but this is conversation
is in a part of the WELL that is readable by anyone: 
<https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/>

The conversation will continue asynchronously for two weeks. Short
link for the conversation is <http://bit.ly/SOTW2021>. Please share
widely. Bookmark the conversation and keep coming back to follow its
progress.

Hashtag is #SOTW2021

If you have a comment or question you want us to post, email it to
inkwell at well.com, preferably with the hashtag in the subject of
your message. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #19 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 21 07:25

    
From <jet> in <inkwell.vue.510.6>:
> There are no groups left of center that
> have "cult craziness"?
>
> How about Greens who still support Jill Stein after she > met with
Putin
> in the same dinner with Michael Flynn?

No doubt true that I should have found and listed some movement on
the left that qualifies as a cult. Honestly, I can't think of any. I
certainly don't see the Green Party as a *cult*, however ill-advised
their activities may be, however misguided their leaders might be. 

I'm checking myself here: what's the definition of "cult"?

My Junior Woodchuck's Guidebook has this: "a system of religious
veneration and devotion directed toward a particular figure or
object." Or "a relatively small group of people having religious
beliefs or practices regarded by others as strange or sinister."

Is Jill Stein subject to "religions veneration and devotion"? I
haven't seen it. And I don't associate the Green Party with
"religious beliefs or practices," but maybe they've gone full Druid
since I last looked.

The point of listing Q Anon and Trumpism is that they're truly
religious, and there is certainly (and oddly) a "veneration and
devotion" directed toward Trump. There is a real and very strange
belief among many Trumpists that this wannabe mobster was sent by
God to save us all. That's definitely cultish behavior.

In fact, Trumpism and Q Anon have nothing to do with "right" or
"left." They operate outside political norms. They seem to suggest a
kind of mass shared psychotic break with consensus reality. 

And the real reason I mentioned those and not others: they have real
power, unlike most cults that are relatively contained and off-grid.
They're leaking into the mainstream culture and creating a dangerous
spreading infection, a Rona of the mind. So they are top of mind
right now.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #20 of 250: Gary Gach (ggg) Tue 5 Jan 21 07:38

    
<16> Malka – Gary Snyder once pointed out that when the common
existence wolves in europe began to diminish is when wolves appeared
in modern fairy tales.

If I may at the outset add to the enthusiasm a couple points of
focus from my Year of the Ox monitor –

• civil war
Giorgio Agamben notes that in ancient Greece, to not take sides
during a civil war was to be ostracized as punishment. After the
civil war, however, it was considered ok, in retrospect. 

• economics
Putting the finger on Control-P merely (IMHO) moves the perilous
cliff a little further off each time, & also makes it steeper. 
Meanwhile, Venezuela wants to make her currency all-digital 

• regenerative agriculture / regenerative everything
Absolutely right, Bruce. "Sustainable" needs to be cashiered.
(Sustaining what for whom via how?) 

• zoom culture & the virtual life
Will Rona make virtual life the default mode? 
What was the last concert play movie public talk anyone attended in
a theater? ( Will 3D come to the rescue in time to keep movie
theaters on life support ? )  I know a teacher in Iran who cannot
teach Spanish without being f2f with her class. Telemedicine, I'm
told, has enabled 5 times more liver cancer surgeries at the big
hospital where I recently had one; I didn't ask how the staff was
coping with five times more work.

h a i k u

     dead of winter
           i freeze
            on zoom


Welcome back, Bruce & Jon – and welcome Malka! I look forward to
lighting up a big juicy stick of incense, sitting back, and
listening as you convene this oasis of sanity in the breathing
desert of daily life. Just to put a finer point on that – I think
I'd soon go mad if I'd tried to wrap my midget brain around the
depths and complexities of the current state of the world without a
community.

Thank you.  

   
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #21 of 250: Alberto Cottica (jonl) Tue 5 Jan 21 07:56

    
Via email from Alberto Cottica:

Hello Jon, Bruce and Malka, thanks for SOTW!

About Jon's point 2 in <inkwell.vue.510.4> (I am not 100% sure I
understand it, disregard if I am off topic). It seems that
sensemaking is not only in crisis because things are objectively
complicated and contradictory, and cultural authority is in crisis.
The other issue is the increasingly strategic use of information,
even in contexts where that was not common practice. I am thinking
of how difficult it is, after 15 years of "data is the new oil",
"the panopticon is here", "data-based personalized medicine for
all!" to get hold of open data over the pandemic. In Italy, where I
am from, there is a minority of activists fighting it out. In
Belgium, where I live, no one even knows how many people we are
vaccinating. Not sure whether this is a capacity issue too (likely),
but definitely spin doctors are at work.

In general, would you not say "data" have shown to be useless in
2020? I expected "data" to enable surgical measures, different
restrictions for different people, but instead we are fighting COVID
with almost medieval measures: curfews, enforced closure of public
spaces, avoidance social contacts, see you at the end.

Not much of a futurist, me :-)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #22 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Tue 5 Jan 21 08:40

    
I found this game designer's analysis of Q Anon fascinating, in
relating the concoction/buy-in of its ever more fantastic beliefs to
game theory, as in "A game that plays people."

<https://medium.com/curiouserinstitute/a-game-designers-analysis-of-qanon-58097
2548be5>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #23 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Tue 5 Jan 21 08:50

    
Hi Alberto,
I'm working through a number of articles about data and
quantification now as preparation for my course
https://malkaolder.wordpress.com/2020/12/17/syllabus-predictive-fictions/ and so many of them rail against misuses of data - and then use it to prove that very misuse. Our problem, as usual, is not with the mechanism, but that we expect the mechanism to do all the work for us; further, when offered examples, we imagine the mechanism has done all the work even when heavy-lifting came from powerful people or organizations with an agenda. It is similar to the way people rail against "social media" when they are angry at the specific configuration of social media created by Twitter or Facebook. Data isn't useless; data is misused. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #24 of 250: ixak (ixak23) Tue 5 Jan 21 10:37

    
Re: Jon's mention of GameB in point #3:

"Fragmented philosophical conversations about sensemaking via
frameworks like GameB; the potentially visionary hashed with the
idealistic and speculative."

This brings to mind the current manifestation of self-governance
practiced in many parts of the Kurdish regions of Turkey and NE
Syria, where for more than half a decade they've been operating
within a sort of democratic confederalism (a la Murray Bookchin via
Abdullah Öcalan).

BruceS has more than passing familiarity with some of the political
dynamics of that region, so I'd be interested in whether he sees a
place for that within the larger...um...Zeitgeist.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #25 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 5 Jan 21 15:05

    
"Political manifestation of cult craziness" is way too narrow a
frame in which to examine a culture-wide epistemic divide. The "cult
craziness" is rejection by a large fraction of Americans of the ways
of finding truth that western civilization has followed for the past
half millennium.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #26 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Tue 5 Jan 21 15:26

    
I've been thinking about what this moment feels like, and in the
midst of the incessant, incremental, frenetic pace of news stories
and mediated events, it feels poised between the decisive action and
the impact. The election is over, the votes are counted, and yet we
are still waiting to see what will happen. The vaccine exists, but
we are waiting to know if distribution and roll-out will be
successful, waiting to get it ourselves, waiting to see the change
in the numbers we follow from day to day. After years of agonizing
and unnecessary brinksmanship, there is a Brexit deal, and we wait
to see what it will mean. 

There is a degree to which this sense of anticipation, of waiting
for a narrative twist or pay-off, is linked to the continual
plumbing of world events for spectacle. It's a part of the gruesome
will-he/ won't-he/ he-did/ oh-there-were-no-consequences that has
served us so poorly over the past four years. In fact, one of the
questions for the coming year is what will happen if the pace of
news, or at least the pace of outrage, slows to a trickle. 

But this extended wait is also scratching at our trust in the
foundational narratives of our societies, because the uncertainty of
this gap shouldn't exist. There's always a delay between the
election and the inauguration, but usually it's completely without
tension. The movie is supposed to end once the vaccine is
engineered, not because the logistics of distribution aren't
difficult, but because their outcome should be as boring and
predictable as an inauguration ceremony. 

This pause is the gap between intention and action; between the
stories we tell about ourselves and what we are. Will we manage to
do what we know we should? Are our countries democracies, after all?
Has our advanced science and medicine saved us? No and not by
itself, of course; these answers have been clear for a while. But
the gap in the surface storytelling may make it harder to pretend.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #27 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Tue 5 Jan 21 17:53

    
Between the idea
And the reality
Between the motion
And the act
Falls the Shadow
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #28 of 250: Marc Brubaker (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 21 00:03

    
Via email from Marc Brubaker:

re: the climate crisis, I've seen some recent news (via 350.org's
social media 
https://cleantechnica.com/2021/01/04/net-zero-emissions-stabilize-climate-quic
kly-uk-scientist/ ) stating that a scientific consensus has started to form that reaching net-zero carbon emissions would cause heating to level off and stabilize within a decade. It doesn't reduce the difficulty of achieving net-zero emissions (and doesn't account for the many interrelated crises underway such as sea levels rise, ocean acidification, deforestation, species dieback, etc., etc.), but this does seem like some degree of good news -- takes the edge off, at least a little.

re: the "bullshit" list -- not sure how "Neoliberalism ruined  ... "
fits in there...
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #29 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 21 00:07

    
Via email from George Mokray: 

Most of this year, we seem to be living in a mash-up of two Jack
London novels:  The Iron Heel and The Scarlet Plague. 

More recently, the behavior of the Trumpublican Party has resembled
a mash-up of two Edgar Alan Poe stories:  The Masque of the Red
Death and Hop Frog.

As per
• regenerative agriculture / regenerative everything

My approach* to climate change is
100% renewables ASAP
zero emissions economy ASAP
carbon drawdown ASAP
geotherapy (not geoengineering) ASAP

Resources:
Healing Earth:  An Ecologist's Journey of Innovation and
Environmental Stewardship by John Todd
https://www.northatlanticbooks.com/shop/healing-earth/

Geotherapy:  Innovative Methods of Soil Fertility Restoration,
Carbon Sequestration, and Reversing CO2 Increase
https://www.crcpress.com/Geotherapy-Innovative-Methods-of-Soil-Fertility-Resto
ration-Carbon-Sequestration/Goreau-Larson-Campe/p/book/9781466595392

Biodiversity for a Livable Climate has been organizing conferences
on various aspects of geotherapy over the last few years.  Subjects
have covered not only soil carbon sequestration and regenerative
agriculture or forestry but also freshwater and ocean systems,
biodiversity and ecological design….
http://bio4climate.org/conferences/

Some climate scientists are beginning to see some data that after
zeroing out greenhouse gas emissions the atmosphere may restore
itself much more quickly than previously thought.  Geotherapy, using
ecological systems to repair the damage homo sap sap (that sap) has
done, also produces quicker than expected results, at least in some
instances.

* 
http://solarray.blogspot.com/2018/12/my-approach-to-climate-change.html
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #30 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 21 01:25

    
I agree with Dr Malka about the problematic aspects of the public
getting all gosh-wow and tech-grateful about the almighty vaccines,
but even though I'm personally grateful that the vaccines exist, I
don't think the vaccines will be perceived as glamorous tech
miracles that demonstrate our dominance of nature.

I think the vaccines will mostly be a source of anxiety, that their
manufacture, rollout and deployment will be extensively and
embarrassingly bungled, that they won't work perfectly or
permanently, and that new strains of the coronavirus will evade
them.  So my bet is that they'll be seen by the public as more as a
painful nuisance and a grim necessity than a shiny silver bullet.

Also, the anti-vax people are entrenched, and Bill Gates, who is one
of the more morally-attractive Big Tech oligarchs, has been
extensively vilified for his efforts to do good.   Even if Bill
pulled a Jimmy Carter and spent the rest of his life personally
injecting the needy, the folklore about Bill as a Vaccine Microchip
Nosferatu is, in my opinion, permanent.  Bill's good works may have
salved his conscience but his reputation is befouled with oceans of
rumor and slander.    

That's irrational, but it's emotively powerful, and these new forms
of superstition are inherent in the architecture of participation in
social media.  The networks breed the nuttiness we have; they're
hotbeds of rumor and crowd-mania; we're enduring the direct
consequences of what we built here.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #31 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 21 01:26

    

I see a lot of stark surveillance-capitalism fear from people who
are nowhere near so blatantly nuts as antivaxxers, but similarly
buffaloed in coming to terms with existent reality.  They'll compile
dreadful lists of the many cruel ways in which Amazon numbers every
hair on your head, but they don't seem to notice that Amazon's own
employees will drop dead and Amazon doesn't notice or care.   They
also forget that Jeff Bezos got doxxed for a love affair and it
ruined his marriage, estranged his kids and cost him the largest
divorce settlement in the history of the universe.  The masters of
surveillance are among its biggest victims.

 Also, if the surveillance is so intense, fearsome and
all-encompassing now, then why is public life so obviously loose,
corrupt and poorly organized?  Shouldn't grifters be immediately
outed for all their dirty money, because of something they said
while Alexa was snooping?  If surveillance capitalism and its Big
Data algorithms worked as well as alarmists feared they worked, then
our world ought to be one of neatly freeze-dried technocratic
police-state order, but that's not what daily life actually looks
like under modern social conditions.  Sure, everything is
sorta-kinda surveilled, but there's no sense of decency or
propriety, and we're a lot more piratical than we are panoptical.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #32 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 21 01:27

    

However, I think that this year the surveillance debate will
improve.   I see hints of some new common-sense emerging.   It's a
little bit like pitifully afraid of  wicked spies under the bed, but
when you're actually governed by wicked spies, as the Russians are,
you're less irrationally respectful of them, and you get a better
understanding of their inherent limits as power-players.   Not that
the problems go away, mind you; you just get a better grip on the
existent situation.

Little Tech used to move fast and break things, but Big Tech moves
slow and still breaks things, so they make a much easier target than
they once did.  And, they know that.  So they're adjusting — but not
nimbly.  They move like elephants now.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #33 of 250: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Wed 6 Jan 21 06:02

    
I'm wondering why "crypto-" didn't make the bullshit list,
particularly with regard to "cryptocurrency" and its supposed
disruptive effects. Is it because it's not bullshit, or that it fits
under heading "disrupt the industry," or for some other reason? 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #34 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 6 Jan 21 06:15

    
[<echodog> posted while I was composing. In WELL terminology, we say
that he "slipped," i.e. his post slipped in ahead of mine. My post
was inspired by Bruce's latest.]

The established technology infrastructure we've grown over the last
three decades is rather chaotic, I think by design. The Internet was
built to support decentralization and innovation at the edges, and
that's been happening. And it was built from a kind of political
utopian idealism that seemed valid enough at the time, because
initial users were nerds who were innocent of the potential evil
ways the technology might be leveraged as it became mainstream. In
fact, many of us never suspected that it would mainstream as
successfully and pervasively as it has. The garden of Eden has been
growing and spreading over the planet, and filling with all sorts of
weeds and thorns, and opportunistic beasts creeping through the
understory.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #35 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Wed 6 Jan 21 11:19

    
My question for Bruce: What's the point of calling bullshit on the long
list of terms in post <13>? Are these the topics you feel are no longer
deserving of attention, or it this a call to get busy with our
'composting' efforts?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #36 of 250: Gail Williams (gail) Wed 6 Jan 21 12:16

    
Good question, Craig.

Wondering about what Jon said about the Internet being "built from a
kind of political utopian idealism." The people I found most
interesting in the 90s - present company in many cases very much
included - were hopeful about changing the world in ways that
included and supported everyone. Somehow. Maybe slightly varied
flavors of Utopia. 

But we all knew the infrastructure threading us together came from
military research as well as hippie hacker homebrew activists, and
always had phone companies and other big money players salivating
over it. So power and profits were never much of an afterthought, no
matter the joys of freely playing with like minded people in corners
of the then largely unknown networks.

I have been doing pandemic cleaning, tossing a lot of
three-hole-punch binders and proceedings from conferences from that
decade. The fanciful and aspirational voices were a minority. Some
of them were sincere and rousing but slightly ridiculous at the time
and more so in retrospect. 

My first time speaking to a technical body was at a IEEE gathering
facing a roomful of engineers with pocket protectors - I respected
that! I thought there would be worthwhile cultural crossover. But
values are deep. Respect for a better salary and more opportunity
for self and family might be deeper. Whatever the brilliant
engineers heard that day about designing privacy and inclusion into
the applications to come was certainly an afterthought to the
presentations of new ideas and fresh patents for presenting
streaming entertainment, and visions of well-paid work leading to
profitable enterprises. Big corporate money was always in the
invisible room. And I know racism and misogeny were there along with
the dreams and visions of harmony. 
 
But that's looking backwards. Old timers. at the very least, have no
excuse for being naive about opportunistic beasts. At some point,
from someone's point of view, we are all such beasts. At some time
we are acting for ourselves (or for the survival of our children)
and all of us are thinking we might as well get good at it.  
  
Short of utopia, how do we get to a mostly benign and relatively
cooperative human condition? Do most people even want that, or is it
more exciting to fight and even die for your
community/religion/nation/compound/cadre/tribe? Wrapped in glory and
egged on as heroes...    
 
Anyway, about that utopian idealism. Long may that vision be part of
the blend. But not a blinder to all the other forces at play.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #37 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Wed 6 Jan 21 12:37

    
Are we surprised? 

People have said there would be violence and a coup attempt, the
perpetrators said what they were planning to do. It has been said
over and over again. And yet, Twitter is peppered with comments of
the "I can't believe this is happening here" variety. 

In part, this is US exceptionalism, the same kind that created the
"it's like a third-world country" [sic] responses to Hurricane
Katrina, another disaster both predicted and predictable. 

There's another kind of exceptionalism going on as well, one that
seeks to separate the moment of crisis from everything before. I see
this often in disaster research; the not-normalness of the disaster,
the sense of break, becomes almost talismanic. It is a defensive
response: <i>This is not real.<i> But believing in the
exceptionalism of disaster also means separating it from the long
roots that lead up to almost every one. 

What I learned working in disaster response is that the sooner you
can change your mentality from "normal" work to disaster mode, the
better your response will be. What I learned researching disasters
is that people try very hard to make disasters exogenous, Acts of
God or inexplicable tribalism or sudden and unprecedented or all of
the above. That's a way of hiding the causes of the crisis and
avoiding accountability.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #38 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 6 Jan 21 14:17

    
When we were in Greece a few years ago we drove past their
parliament building and saw several dozen members of Golden Dawn, in
their black-and-gold regalia, standing on the lawn in front of the
building. The Proud Boys have adopted their color scheme and their
fascist politics, and today they're being more aggressive than
Golden Dawn was.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #39 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 6 Jan 21 16:26

    
Jake Angeli "QAnon Shaman" is already my favorite among the Trump
occupation militia. To see a shamanic figure in a horned headdress
sending Senators fleeing was like witnessing yuppies levitating the
Pentagon.

My wife once stormed a capital building during a revolution.  If
Trump had won re-election the Republicans would have very likely
simply given him term number three and then the seditionaries would
be a different demographic.

Militias have been busting into statehouses for some time now, so to
be all flatfooted and surprised about this is simply to betray one's
naivete.  Even if Washington is put under lockdown I'd be expecting
trouble at Red State statehouses; the "Patriots" are gonna compare
notes and they will gleefully bully anybody who flinches and
appeases them.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #40 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 6 Jan 21 17:54

    
I'm having trouble seeing the humor in sending senators fleeing from
their chamber, no matter how fancy one's silly hat is.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #41 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Thu 7 Jan 21 01:42

    
What a collision between substance and the
almost-ex-comemierda-in-chief's cult of superficiality (he *acts*
like a millionaire so he must be a millionaire; he's a millionaire
so he must be a savvy businessman; he fires people on TV so he must
be a CEO; ETC). In substance, the insurrectionists accomplished very
little last night, other than property damage; if anything, they
seem to have set back their shambolic "cause" by pushing some
Congress people away from their objections. It is almost ridiculous
that they thought breaking things and taking selfies in a mostly
empty building might change the results of an election. 

But symbolically, they were successful. Those selfies will
aggrandize them to their friends and followers and uncertain
hangers-on; by playing out their fantasies on camera they draped
themselves in the connotations of the action movie heroes they were
cosplaying; above all, the immunity with which they proceeded to
attack the symbols of legitimate power will embolden others and
diminish that legitimacy in their eyes. 

Both successful and a failure, depending on what you see and what
you value. What will it take to move people towards valuing
substance over superficiality?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #42 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 7 Jan 21 03:08

    
I think the insurrection makes my point about the weakness of
surveillance.  These guys are surveilling themselves committing
these deeds and spreading them virally.  All the Global War on
Terror gear installed at such pains and expense in Washington might
as well have been tissue.

"Panoptical" and "piratical" are the same thing.

The "little green men" secessionists in the Ukraine War did a ton of
this; they were covert operatives in homemade camouflage, but they
were also relentless about spreading memes, shooting digital videos
and wearing socially-designed roleplay costumes.  They looked
comical at first, but once the shooting started their tactics
improved a lot; they've a frozen conflict zone but their ethnic
fighters are formidable combat veterans.

Interesting article in the  pro-Trumpian WASHINGTON TIMES in which
home-made zealots use "face recognition" to deliberately
mis-identify rather well-known right-wing activists as "Antifa." 
They're using the allure of computer surveillance to flood the zone
with bullshit.

This propaganda of the deed has accomplished a lot for the
alt-right; I don't doubt some of them will go to prison, but the
others are a lot closer to the right-wing goal of becoming captains
of fascist squadristi.  We're gonna see no-go zones and the other
associated lawlessness you see with say, narcoterror activities —
they're ethnonational patriots, but they're also tireless grifters,
so there's gonna be a whole lot of black money involved.  

My guess is that the Trump Regime goes underground now, and they
just start accumulating tough-guy untouchables.  They've committed
so many offenses that they kinda need a militia to stay out of
prison, and I'm thinking that's Florida, a kind of Trump Disneyland
with don't-tread-on-me private security.

Also, if the Alt-Right looks much stronger, the US Congress looks
much, much weaker.  To see them cringing and sniveling in their seat
of power as they couldn't certify a free election, that's the kind
of bad optics you just don't get over; they've been profaned and
stripped of dignity with a Trumpian thoroughness; they're really
just, ripped-off suckers and loser weak-sisters.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #43 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:12

    
<inkwell.vue.510.37> <malka>

"Twitter is peppered with comments of the 'I can't believe this is
happening here' variety."

I also said "I can't believe this was happening," but I was
responding to the fact that it seemed to finally sink in with the
Trumpists formerly known as Republican legislators that they were
backing a seriously demented horse in a race to the Apocalypse. I
had pretty much decided they'd gone morally blind.

Appreciate your insight about the blindness around preventable
disasters (especially those that emerge slowly, e.g. anthropogenic
climate change.)

<inkwell.vue.510.42> <malka>

"It is almost ridiculous that they thought breaking things and
taking selfies in a mostly empty building might change the results
of an election."

I'm not thinking they expected success in overturning the election,
though perhaps they were deluded enough to think so. However I think
they were riding the crest of Trump's irrational anger, acting as
instruments of his rage. As with any tantrum, there was likely no
goal beyond acting out.

In that they were no doubt successful.

<inkwell.vue.510.42> <bruces>

"All the Global War on Terror gear installed at such pains and
expense in Washington might as well have been tissue."

Because they were welcomed as friendlies, apparently. I'm hearing
that some of the Capitol police removed barricades and let the
insurrectionists into the building, even shot selfies with them. 

"To see them cringing and sniveling in their seat of power as they
couldn't certify a free election, that's the kind of bad optics you
just don't get over; they've been profaned and stripped of dignity
with a Trumpian thoroughness; they're really just, ripped-off
suckers and loser weak-sisters."

This might be true if they'd simply crawled away, but when the
building was secure they came back and did their business, and in
the process regained dignity. It was surprising and heartening to
see someone like Kelly Loeffler, who'd just lost her election,
renounce her objection to the vote, as did several others. 

Today's NY Times had this headline: "Congress Confirms Biden's Win,
Defying Mob Attack."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #44 of 250: Anonymous (fruitbatpangolin) (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:16

    
Two anonymous comments from "fruitbatpangolin":

#1

Keeping in mind that the real reason that the sun never sets on the
British Empire is because God doesn’t trust the British in the dark,
and while pestilence stalks the globe, that even Jesus was killed by
a cross contamination, I would allow a bit of snarky humour in
witnessing senators scattered by half naked representatives of the
popular Tory splinter group, “Vikings Against Migration” (logo; an
image of a longship, with a big red cross over the top of it).

Facetious sardony in the face of crisis is one of the most
functional aspects of humour. Giggle a bit at last night, is only
going to get weirder and more stupid from here on out. Here be
dragons, and they’re all playing naked bicycle polo.

#2

As we awaken, or struggle through on brandy coffee and buckfast, it
seems that a popular Republican take on the night’s events appears
to be; 

‘The unforgivable invasion of the capital building by half naked men
in comedy Viking hats was a noble and edifying protest by an
entirely justified and peacefully violent mob of democracy loving
all American patriots who want to stop the election, Joe Biden is
therefore responsible for all of this, and furthermore, it was
perpetrated by a secret qabal of antifa, cleverly disguised as well
known qanon uchube slebs, enabling evasion of police while they took
selfies with them.’

Seems perfectly legit and very normal.

I definitely witness no glaringly wide, expansive, and possibly
bottomless logical chasms capable of sailing a moderately sized
flotilla of aircraft carriers through. No sirree.

The US shouldn’t be too glum though. Was looking pretty similar last
night to the vast majority of legislative handover processes in
history. I suppose that it was even somewhat democratic, in that
sense.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #45 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:17

    
>... it seemed to finally sink in with the
>Trumpists formerly known as Republican legislators that they were
>backing a seriously demented horse in a race to the Apocalypse.

True in the Senate, much less so in the House, where 121 Republican
representatives voted to sustain the objection to Arizona's
electoral votes.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #46 of 250: Michael Bravo (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:18

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

I wanted to add a few little nitpicks early on, and a solitary
observation that might be of some interest

Year of the Ox is still ahead of us, it begins in February on the
Western calendar. Until then, we are stuck with the Rat.

"Little green men" in Ukraine, or, more specifically, in Crimea
where the term originated from, were not at all covert operatives,
nor were they local secessionists. They were overtly-deployed, full
gear, masked, spec-ops Russian forces, just without any recognizable
markings and a strict "silent smile, no comments" policy. There was,
and is, a sizable disinformation campaign going on around the whole
mess, with memes and lies and all the juicy Olgino troll factory
stuff, but it doesn't intersect with boots on the ground.

As to the Trumpism, I have been observing with some interest the
parallels between its rise and the happenings in a massive online
game called EvE Online, where a few years back a group of people
hailing from forums on a website SomethingAwful have created an
ingame association labeled GoonSwarm, with all the faux-punk,
in-your-face, nihilist, 4Chan-flavoured demeanor that is so often
proudly displayed in this parallel, real-life cult-ish movement.
Luckily, EvE can be experienced entirely virtually, but the social
similarities and raging passions are quite something.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #47 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:21

    
<inkwell.vue.510.45> <sweeney>

Thanks for pointing that out. It's true that I was mostly looking at
the Senate. As for the House, I'm thinking there should be an base
IQ test requirement for Congressional candidates...
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #48 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:43

    
Historian Heather Cox Richardson published a detailed account of
yesterday's events in DC:
<https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/p/january-6-2021?r=44cfz&utm_campaig
n=post&utm_medium=email&utm_source=copy>

Excerpt:

"Within an hour, a violent mob stormed the Capitol and Cruz, along
with the rest of the lawmakers, was rushed to safety (four
quick-thinking staffers brought along the electoral ballots, in
their ceremonial boxes). As the rioters broke in, police shot and
killed one of them: Ashli Babbitt, an Air Force veteran from San
Diego, QAnon believer, and staunch Trump supporter. The
insurrectionists broke into the Senate chamber, where one was
photographed on the dais of the Senate, shirtless and wearing a bull
costume that revealed a Ku Klux Klan tattoo on his abdomen. They
roamed the Capitol looking for Pence and other lawmakers they
considered enemies. Not finding them, they ransacked offices. One
rioter photographed himself sitting at House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s
desk with his feet on it.

"They carried with them the Confederate flag.

"Capitol police provided little obstruction, apparently eager to
avoid confrontations that could be used as propaganda on social
media. The intruders seemed a little surprised at their success,
taking selfies and wandering around like tourists. One stole a
lectern."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #49 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 06:52

    
Judd Legum reports that CEOs are considering cutting off donations
to politicians who supported Trump's coup attempt:
https://popular.info/p/the-chickens-come-home-to-roost?r=44cfz&utm_campaign=po
st&utm_medium=web&utm_source=copy

"On Wednesday, the Wall Street Journal reported on 'a virtual
gathering of chief executives' to 'discuss political turbulence
stemming from the 2020 election.' On the call, 'leaders of some of
the largest U.S. companies said they were considering withholding
donations to Republican lawmakers seeking to impede the presidential
transition.'

"The group included executives from Deloitte, Disney, Accenture, and
Goldman Sachs, among others. Many members of the group have signed
statements acknowledging Biden's victory and calling for a peaceful
transfer of power. But the group also discussed 'withholding
political contributions, which some viewed as more meaningful than
public statements.' Some executives also said, 'they would
reconsider hiring, business and investments in states whose
officials were fighting the transition.'"
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #50 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 7 Jan 21 07:16

    
"One in five voters - including 45% of Republicans - approve of the
storming of the Capitol building"

https://today.yougov.com/topics/politics/articles-reports/2021/01/06/US-capito
l-trump-poll
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #51 of 250: Lisa Poskanzer (lrph) Thu 7 Jan 21 07:45

    
Maybe that group of executives should support legislation that
matches those words - as in campaign finance reform across the
board. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #52 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 7 Jan 21 10:34

    
excellent point, Lisa.

From Malka's post #37, I found this of great interest:

>>I see this often in disaster research; the not-normalness of the
disaster, the sense of break, becomes almost talismanic. It is a
defensive response: <i>This is not real.<i> But believing in the
exceptionalism of disaster also means separating it from the long
roots that lead up to almost every one. 

>>What I learned working in disaster response is that the sooner you
can change your mentality from "normal" work to disaster mode, the
better your response will be. What I learned researching disasters
is that people try very hard to make disasters exogenous, Acts of
God or inexplicable tribalism or sudden and unprecedented or all of
the above. That's a way of hiding the causes of the crisis and
avoiding accountability.

[for non-Well readers, the >> is how quotes are generally identified
in this community when pasted in]

Outrage and surprise are useful emotions, because they inform that
something matters greatly. But the point I see being made above is
that they can also be obscuring emotions, because they disguise the
continuity between cause and effect that in this case have been
apparent since 2015, or even earlier.

Malka, I'd like to hear you speak more about effective disaster
response, and particularly about the difference between short-run
and long-term effective disaster response. We've had a four year, or
perhaps more accurately a 40 year, disaster in this country. What
might constitute an effective response is the difficult & necessary
question.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #53 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Thu 7 Jan 21 13:54

    
First, in response to Jon's #49 about CEOs, two more data points:
1/ an article in the Financial Times from yesterday (before the
assault on the capitol) by Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson, James Politi,
and Courtney Weaver (which I found because it was tweeted by Francis
"End of History" Fukuyama), titled "Diehard Trump Republicans on
collision course with US business", included this quote: 'Richard
Edelman, head of the eponymous public relations group, said: “CEOs
are scared. They don’t like the idea America is a banana republic.'"
2/ yesterday after or during the attack, Chevron tweeted, "We call
for the peaceful transition of the U.S. government. The violence in
Washington, D.C. tarnishes a two-century tradition of respect for
the rule of law. We look forward to engaging with President-Elect
Biden and his administration to move the nation forward."

A banana republic is, in fact, a country controlled by corporations.
These companies, their CEOs, and their poor, misguided social media
managers (the replies to the Chevron tweet are a treat if you don't
mind being reminded of all the horrible things Chevron has done),
are caught in their own contradiction. They want to control the
country to their benefit; they don't want the country to devolve
into chaos that would hurt their sales; they don't want it to be
*obvious* that they are controlling the country. They want to be on
a par with nation-states - calling for a peaceful transition in
State Department language - but they don't want the constraints of
statehood or to have to respect the rule of law themselves. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #54 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Thu 7 Jan 21 14:14

    
Jane, there is a lot to say about effective disaster response, short
and long-term. But it is difficult to talk about, because States try
very hard not to define the terms of what effective, or successful,
looks like. States usually don't want to admit disasters are
possible at all, which is part of why preparedness is so
underfunded; they definitely don't want to admit that they are
unprepared for them, ditto; and when they do happen they are
unwilling to admit that they can't help everyone adequately all at
the same time. Unfortunately, that means that they are not clear on
who will be helped first (or better) or why. Sherri Fink has
written, in the study on Katrina FIVE DAYS AT MEMORIAL and in
shorter pieces, about hospitals losing power and being forced to
make triaging decisions on the spot because no one had worked out
the principles beforehand - an observation with tragic resonances
now. Governments typically can't decide, or define, whether they are
trying to rebuild better or only cover exactly what was lost or
control for (spurious) moral hazard or protect assets - and usually
what they do want to do is not something that scans well in spin, so
they say something else.

But you were asking about effective response. In my experience, the
key to effective response is organization, rather than money (in
fact too much money, as I've written, can be a bad thing). The best
thing to do in a response is get everyone involved, to their
capacity; to think of the people who have special needs or are most
vulnerable and take care of them first; and to start, painfully,
adjusting to the cracked new worldview as quickly and smoothly as
possible while grieving the old. I can give some examples; the
disaster response in Japan after the tsunami was far from perfect,
but the evacuation centers - often more than a thousand people
living in close quarters for months - worked best when they
organized people into groups to take on tasks such as cleaning,
cooking, and representation. Many arranged for the limited indoor
lavatories to be assigned to the elderly or infirm while everyon
else used portapotties (I repeat, it was not perfect: I heard from
several men involved that women's needs did not occur to them until
far later than they should have, because it didn't occur to them to
ask). Contrast with the infamous situation in the Superdome.

But to rebuild after a disaster, which is I think what you mean by a
long-term disaster response, you have to have some agreement on what
you're building towards. Again to use Japan as an example, some of
the towns there spent years refilling to raise the land higher above
sea-level, during which time no one could rebuild and many people
moved away before reconstruction could happen. I don't know that
there is a satisfactory participatory redesign process; it is very
hard to compromise between the people who want their old home
(perceived or real) back, and the people who see an opportunity to
build something new. 

Not dissimilar to the situation we are facing in the U.S. now. 

We could think possibly about the Marshall Plans in Germany and
Japan as positive examples. Although at this point in the world I'm
hesitant to point at anything involving industrialization and growth
as positive.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #55 of 250: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Thu 7 Jan 21 14:55

    
People with PTSD can be useful in disasters. All of a sudden they're
actually in their element. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #56 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 7 Jan 21 15:11

    
I will just throw in that one of my favorite works of Rebecca
Solnit's is her Paradise Built In Hell, about immediate aftermath to
disasters, and the way people will often self-organize in mutual aid
(and then the authorities come in and suppress that).

One thing that struck me about your post, Malka, was the cognitive
aspect. I read it as saying that what gets lost is a genuine
examination of causes and effects, and that you can't fix what you
don't want to examine too closely. These human tendencies to CYA are
worldwide, it seems. Yet if we don't look at how Sars COV-2 got so
widely loose before it was recognized, how do we forestall the next
pandemic? When it's a frozen O-ring on a rocket and you want to
launch another rocket, the system seems able to look things in the
face. Chernobyl, it was slow, but it does seem people came
ultimately to understand the causes for the effects. As with the
virus, the initial refusal to take a real accounting becomes part of
the problem.

In your reply, you allude to the need for consensus in rebuilding.
I'm also interested in how a society might go about building any
consensus toward seeing things as they actually are *before* the
disaster happens.

A hallmark of the 2020 (and earlier, and continuing) state of the
world was how many seem to embrace a smoke-and-mirror/assertion
worldview as actually viable.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #57 of 250: Alex Davie (icenine) Thu 7 Jan 21 15:53

    
<Again to use Japan as an example, some of
the towns there spent years refilling to raise the land higher above
sea-level, during which time no one could rebuild and many people
moved away before reconstruction could happen. I don't know that
there is a satisfactory participatory redesign process; it is very
hard to compromise between the people who want their old home
(perceived or real) back, and the people who see an opportunity to
build something new.>

Let’s bring this comment closer to home, to wit, North Carolina in
1999, I mobilized, in my capacity as Emergency Response Coordinator
for our Company at the time, when Hurricane Floyd inundated the
State.
We were asked in by the State of North Carolina to deal with the
flooding since we had a long history of responding to disasters of
all types, including train derailments and chemical plant
explosions, etc.

I was there for weeks on end dealing with the flood and it’s after
effects on the poultry and hog raising facilities. But one of the
most poignant stories that came out of the experience is about a
town called Princeville, North Carolina. In my capacity, I
interacted with FEMA personnel on the ground and it is from them
that I heard this story. 

Apparently, according to FEMA, Princeville has been inundated many
times before 1999 and dutifully, FEMA literally stepped in every
time to help them rebuild. But this time according to FEMA records
and the propensity for Princeville to always flood even during
lesser rain events, FEMA brass made a decision to help everyone
re-locate permanently and let the town of Princeville die off
without any residents living there. This decision was published by
FEMA and the outrage by residents was published and what the
residents wanted was re-building of their infrastructure, once
again. FEMA's position was that town was so flood-prone that to
repair the town's infrastructure again would be an exercise in
futility and it would be best just to re-locate everybody and not
repair the town's infrastructure once again. 

Long story, short, after much back and forth, between FEMA, public
meetings, the residents and the lawyers. FEMA backed down and agreed
to repair the town's infrastructure, just like it was before and
FEMA had done so many times previously.

So I get that comment completely...just a story to illustrate the
point...
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #58 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 7 Jan 21 16:17

    
A tweet from Jane Mayer, this morning:

Elaine Chao's resignation, and her husband Mitch McConnell's break
with Trump bring to mind what Ruth Ben-Ghiat, authoritarian expert,
and author of "Strongmen" calls "The phenomenon of elite defection
in the end, when their personal safety is in peril."

<https://twitter.com/janemayernyer/status/1347256228473409536>

-----

All those CEOs heard Trump three months ago, as the rest of us did,
"I'll accept the results of the election if we win." They've watched
him agitate to overturn democratic results for the past two months.
What they say now has no credibility. There is no moral power in
stepping across to the winning side after the decision is clear.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #59 of 250: Lisa Poskanzer (lrph) Thu 7 Jan 21 16:34

    
>>There is no moral power in
stepping across to the winning side after the decision is clear.

word
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #60 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Fri 8 Jan 21 03:15

    
Jane, indeed there is a large literature about people
self-organizing after disaster; one of my favorites is this one,
from 1958, about a group of people stranded at a highway rest stop
in a snowstorm: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/citations/ADA955234

But there are many factors that can reduce that tendency to
self-organizing. Take my example of the Superdome. It was enormous,
far larger than the Japanese evacuation centers. There were some
official representatives there, but they did not have or take a
leadership role. Communications about what was happening and what to
expect were inconsistent and unclear.

One problem we have is in the types of stories we tell and what we
see as heroic; another, intersecting one is in how we budget. We
like stories about action and solitary heroes: people gravitate
towards responding rather than preparing, working overtime and not
sharing information. Preparedness rarely gets recognized, because
often the thing being prepared for either doesn't happen, or when it
happens seems less dangerous *because* it was prepared for (think of
all the epidemic warnings over the past two decades that didn't
become full pandemics)

It's easier in most organizations to budget for things, not people,
and so we end up focusing on less effective physical things (the
number of disaster evaluations that say that if we had only had
interoperable communications it would have worked out perfectly!)
rather than the uncertain and difficult to measure tasks of hiring
and training people who can think on their feet, support others,
promote organization.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #61 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Fri 8 Jan 21 03:16

    
(speaking of frozen O-rings, have you read Diane Vaughan's excellent
book on the Challenger?)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #62 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Fri 8 Jan 21 03:27

    
In terms of consensus, I think we need to be restrained in what we
aim for. Not only because it is a daunting task to build agreement
in the US; when I think of "shared world views" common to a lot of
people I think of propaganda and cult programming. The Lost Cause
ideology is after all a very successful shared world view, to take
one example. People will say "oh, but our shared world view is
reality-based" but reality is not such a firm concept. Also, I think
societies need opposition and contrasts and different opinions. And
to go back to the daunting part, you're never going to get every
single person to want the same thing, even if that same thing is, I
don't know, 2000 dollars to everyone! Someone is always going to be
contrarian. 

One approach is focusing on process. If you can get people to agree,
at least most of them, on the process that is used for deciding,
then satisfying everyone with the details becomes less important.
However, the process cannot take too long. And there might need to
be some limits on the democracy of it; take the North Carolina
example from Alex, or the US Flood Insurance program. 

We do know how to brainwash the majority of the people into being
relatively content and pleased with themselves; that's what US
exceptionalism is. Building a shared consensus about how to live
ethically and without destroying the world is going to be more
challenging. We're going to need much more education and perhaps a
lot of made-for-TV movies.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #63 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 8 Jan 21 06:44

    
> reality is not such a firm concept.

I've been thinking a lot about this, and others have, too. There's a
natural human tendency to assume we know more than we know. Our
perceptions are more limited than we realize, naturally, because we
see what we see and hear what we hear and assume that's reality. But
our perceptions work on a "need to know" basis, where need to know
is a local decision and might miss larger forces at work, and their
implications. The human propensity for denial of the potential for
catastrophe, as with climate change, shouldn't be so surprising.

And Lisa Feldman Barrett made the case, recently, that the "brain is
not for thinking."
<https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/23/opinion/brain-neuroscience-stress.html> She's talking about body budgeting and stress reactions, but it's clear that the brain is primarily engaged in the mechanics of survival. What we call "thinking" uses, and often overuses, cognitive surplus. Our intellectual capacity is probably less than we think. What we consider knowledge is often less organized than we think, a hash of experience and exposure to conversation and concepts - socially and individually constructed. Science is effective because it acknowledges these limitations. Scientific discipline is a workaround.

It's important, I think, to have humility about our perceptions and
capabilities. Meditators eventually realize this: not just that we
are limited, but also that we interdependent in ways that are not
always clear to us. And any one person's perception of reality
should be taken with a block of salt. However through conversations
like this, and through culture and communication in general, our
sharing of perceptions and realities can expand our awareness and
understanding. We're better together than we are as individuals, if
we can avoid being crazy together marching over the cliff.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #64 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 07:47

    
The Congress promptly fled Washington and they left an emptied,
plague-contaminated Capitol for their people-of-color janitors to
mop-up, disinfect, and tidy.  So that ought to baffle the mob -- at
least for a while.  

If the online alt-right breezes through that thin-blue-line of cops
again, they will bring Kyle Rittenhouse.  That coup would not look
much like any conventional, historic well-plotted coup, but
tomorrow's self-righteous teen Kyle would hose down Congress like
any disaffected white male with any automatic rifle in any American
elementary school.   

Hopefully, a few abject hours of kneeling and praying during riot
and gunfire has wised up the US Congress to their mortally perilous
situation on both sides of the aisle, but quite possibly, that's not
so at all.  The people in Congress might be under the fatal delusion
that only black Congress members would ever get shot.  

They might even unwisely imagine that American cops who've been
dying of plague while violently clubbing their own neighbors would
never lose their tempers and just say the hell with it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #65 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:10

    

American domestic affairs, however dramatic and intriguing, will not
dominate the world during MMXXI because (a) the USA is an
international political laughingstock and (b) the USA is seriously
diseased.

So I would like to call some attention to a "weak signal" that I
think may have major near-future world significance.  That is the
tense border brawling between China and India in the Himalayas.  

During 2020, there was alarmingly brutal and bloody hand-to-hand
fighting on the Chinese/Indian "Line of Control" border, imaginary
map-lines in a frozen, barren, airless part of the world that's
literally worse than useless. I've been trying to figure out why
Beijing and New Delhi would permit or encourage such an apparently
unreasonable clash.

But I think I do get it: the Sino-Indian "border" conflict is not
about mere borderlines, but actually about roads.  Or, to make it
seem a little more complicated, it's about shipping logistics.  
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #66 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:12

    
The Chinese have been Belt-and-Roading their heads off in this
general area. Things seemed tolerable on this obscure, icy border
until the *Indians* began building roads also. 

Now, you might think this infrastructural development would be of
mutual use to both countries -- that the Chinese would smile
craftily and say, "Hey, let's link these roads up, we'll flood your
country with our cheap, efficient goods!" 

However, that was the earlier, 1990s paradigm of globalization.  A
paradigm that wanted to make the mighty Himalayas "flat" so as
compete on business-models.

Things turned sour fast, because Prime Minister Modi, head honcho of
India, has become the most attentive pupil of Xi Jinping of China. 
Modi is much impressed by Xi's autocratic success, so Modi has
become an adept China mimic: he numbers all the citizenry in the
Aadhaar databank, he turns Kashmir into Xinjiang with all kinds of
surveillance heavy-manners and Internet controls, he turns his BJP
Party into Chinese-style party cadres, he cultivates his own
Chinese-style cult-of-personality -- step by step, Modi is
constructing a Modi-centric Indian government that is "Chinese
technocracy with Indian characteristics."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #67 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:15

    

Most Indians who I follow in social media are Indian creative types,
so naturally they don't like this dictatorial heavy-handedness at
all, and I entirely understand why they resent it so much.    Indian
creatives don't want to be anything like Chinese creatives, and for
good and sensible reasons.  The Chinese woes are fantastic.  

As a brief, illustrative aside, during this last Christmas of 2020,
a  Chinese computer-game mogul -- he built the "Game of Thrones"
game in China, and he made a mint from it -- was about to do the
sci-fi film of the Chinese sci-fi mega-bestseller "Three Body
Problem" for Netflix.   Then somebody fatally poisoned him.  The
murderer used "fugu" neurotoxin, or so says the rumor, but it's by
by no means a rumor that Lin Qi of Yoozoo Games is as dead as a
stone. 

So much for the Chinese global soft-power charm offensive.  Netflix
was genuinely eager to promote that highly promising movie project
to the non-Chinese global masses, and it probably would have been a
big worldwide hit, too, but offshored cultural success doesn't
interest the Chinese government. The Chinese will even abduct and
lock up Fan Bingbing,  the prettiest actress in China, not because
she lacks glamorous success, but because she's got way too much of
it.  They don't like Chinese creative artists that the world might
admire.  Chinese global creativity is an internal threat.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #68 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:20

    

So one might naively imagine that the Chinese might look with some
avuncular kindness on this Indian aspiration to become a
Chinese-style one-party state.  "Oh look!  How cute!  Those South
Asians in their Subcontinent want to be just like us, they're even
building their own belts-and-roads!"  The Americans always think
it's sweet whenever other countries want to Americanize, but when
other nations want to Sinicize, the Chinese suffer aggressive
panic-attacks.  

For them, it's not just "Our way or the highway," it's "Our highway,
and you don't get to build any highways."

This is problematic.  Because the Chinese have won the
Post-Internet.  In MMXXI, every nation-state wants to have a
"National Sovereign Cyberspace" just like China has, because the
archaic flat-and-neutral Internet, as the technocratic platform for
whizzy, value-free globalization, must be attacked, hacked, looted
and destroyed for the sake of the new ethnonational order.

However, the triumphant Chinese can't brook any non-Chinese
imitators or any peer-competitors.  The Chinese can't imagine that
mere foreigners might find their way of life attractive.  So the
Chinese  have violently attacked India, and they're very "Wolf
Warrior" about doing that, even though the Chinese cinema company
that produced the epic Chinese cinema megahits "Wolf Warrior 1 & 2"
is going broke in a welter of accounting scandals in MMXXI.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #69 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:23

    

The geopolitical problem is: the Chinese don't want old-fashioned
"roads."  They want fully-controlled logistic channels across the
planet that they can dominate.  They want physical "roads" that are
the analog equivalent of Chinese National Cyberspace.  That's a
novel thing to demand from the geopolitical order.  But others will
promptly make the same demands, anyhow.

In the 2020s, we're gonna see a lot of this struggle, as earlier
global transit situations, and logistical situations, and data-flow
situations, which used to be smooth, flat, easy, painless and
boring, become snarled, complicated, punitive and irrationally
jealous.  

The existent epidemic quarantines are disguising these brand-new
blockades and off-the-wall shoot-to-kill Checkpoint Charlies, but
when-and-if if Covid19 recedes -- as, hopefully, it does later this
year -- these red-tape blockades will become stark and naked. Look
today at the giant parking lots in Kent full of Brexit trucks. Look
today at various huge wrecking yards full of dead cruise-liners and
abandoned jumbo jets.  That's what the de-globalized 2020s must look
like tomorrow.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #70 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 8 Jan 21 08:32

    

Those junkyards of lost prosperity and lost cosmopolitanism are what
the ethnonational take-back-control movements have built for our
world, because they can't function otherwise.  However, as this
decade extends,  people will bang painfully into these new
post-Internet limits, which basically state: "Oh well, people with
your passport, language and skin tint cannot be allowed to access
that, admire that, or go there."

"Information wants to be free" is long over in MMXXI.  It was a
historic moment, but it was replaced by the surveillance-capital Big
Tech doctrine  "Information about you wants to be free to us."   

However, that profiteering doctrine also got old and stale, and the
contemporary problem is an identity-politics crisis.  It's about the
deeper, culture-war reality of Us not really being Us and You never
really being You; the Jekyll-and-Hyde horror of having to denounce
your own face in the mirror, while you have to batter the people who
love you best.

 "I hate every evil Mexican and cuckold Canadian, except for you,
Mom and Dad." "Destroy all illegal immigrants except for the First
Lady and her son and heir."  There is no exit strategy from this.   

It's the "Globalization of Balkanization;" in order to draw the
sharp and bloody boundary between You and Me, I have to bloodily cut
my own flesj into pieces. My eye and my hand are fatally offensive
to my self-cramping identity, so I have to turn the pages of my
righteous Scripture one-handed, while I squint with my one remaining
eye.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #71 of 250: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Fri 8 Jan 21 10:33

    
The Balkanization has several strange international features that
cross these identity boundaries, however. To look at the actual
Balkans, for example (or maybe we should now call it the Original
Balkans,) it's interesting to see how various nation state and
sub-national groups are coalescing around cultural touchstones that
define them in relation others. Serbia is within Russia's orbit, but
the international neo-Nazi scene also lauds Serbia for war against
the Muslim Bosniacs back in the 90s. Oddly enough, this includes
many of the same neo-Nazis who fought against Russia on the side of
Ukraine during the active Donbass conflict. (Ukraine has its own
neo-Nazi wing, and it's interesting to see how Russia and Ukraine
are jockeying for influence among the farthest-right segment of
European society.) To cite another example, Russian-backed
mercenaries and Turkish-backed mercenaries are in open conflict in
Libya...but some of these same elements have directly cooperated in
Syria to suppress ISIS. 

So the lines of identity blur in several different ways when they
intersect with existing nation-state interests. Only China seems to
remain fairly uni-polar, which makes them kind of unique in this day
and age. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #72 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 21 05:46

    
Via email from Brian Slesinsky (apologies: this was sent two days
ago and we missed it):

Jon had a disclaimer at the beginning about how almost everything we
know about the outside world comes to us via intermediaries. This
has always been true, but during the pandemic this seems especially
relevant, not only due to staying home but because we are attempting
to understand and predict the behavior of an invisible menace.

The failures of official sources to be all that authoritative have
been obvious to all. I think the Onion put best: "CDC Unveils List
Of Twitter Accounts You Can Follow To Piece Together Vaccine
Information."

But it's still easy to underestimate how much we rely on trust and
how far removed we often are from concrete evidence. I keep going
back to an essay by an anonymous author who has apparently become
very cynical while reading lots of scientific papers based on
surveys.

Survey Chicken by a literal banana
<https://carcinisation.com/2020/12/11/survey-chicken/>

> In the abstract, I think a lot of people would agree with me that
surveys are bullshit. What I don’t think is widely known is how much
“knowledge” is based on survey evidence, and what poor evidence it
makes in the contexts in which it is used. The nutrition study that
claims that eating hot chili peppers makes you live longer is based
on surveys. The twin study about the heritability of joining a gang
or carrying a gun is based on surveys of young people. The economics
study claiming that long commutes reduce happiness is based on
surveys, as are all studies of happiness, like the one that claims
that people without a college degree are much less happy than they
were in the 1970s. The study that claims that pornography is a
substitute for marriage is based on surveys. That criminology
statistic about domestic violence or sexual assault or drug use or
the association of crime with personality factors is almost
certainly based on surveys. (Violent crime studies and statistics
are particularly likely to be based on extremely cursed instruments,
especially the Conflict Tactics Scale, the Sexual Experiences
Survey, and their descendants.) [...]

[...]

> Why is it important that surveys are new? I think it is important
to remember that there is no ancestral practice equivalent to
surveys. That is to say, there is no ancient human practice or
context in which people anonymously tell the pure, innocent truth
with language, in response to questioning, with no thought for the
motives of the questioner or the effect of their answers. However,
in the new, wholly invented ethnomethod of [doing a survey], it is
imagined that subjects do tell the innocent truth, comprehending the
underlying sense of the question but not answering with any motive
or particularity of context. The anonymity of survey takers is given
as proof that they feel free to tell the truth, rather than being
perceived as a bar to asking them what they might have meant by
their responses.

[...]

> But in the case of surveys, even if all assumptions fail, if all
the pieces of the machine fail to function, data is still produced.
There is no collapse or apparent failure of the machinery. But the
data produced are meaningless—perhaps unbeknownst to the audience,
or even to the investigators. What follows is my attempt to identify
the moving parts of survey meaningfulness, with some attention to
how they interact. Keep in mind that all of these are based on an
underlying assumption that there is no outright fraud—that data are
gathered in the way stated, and not made up or altered, either by
the researchers or by any of their subcontractors or employees.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #73 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 21 06:19

    
Number 10 on the list I posted near the start of this year's SOTW:

"Governance crisis in the US and elsewhere. Emergence of autocratic
movements. Challenges to democracy. ('It always happens.' - Adam
Gopnik in The New Yorker)."

This item was one of the most obvious on the list, everybody's been
talking about it for four furious years since the election of the
45th President of the USA, and as it appeared increasingly likely
that he wanted to restore monarchy and be recognized as king. A mad
king, a narcissist who seemed more and more unhinged from ongoing
challenges to his ego. A mad king who continued to resonate with his
evolving cult of devoted, often worshipful followers. Cooler heads
prevailed, he lost the 2020 election, and as so many predicted,
refused to accept the loss. Problematic for presidential transition,
many predicted violence along the way, and sure enough that's
happened. Insurrection, a storming of the Nation's Capitol by the
cult of Donald.

Almost doesn't seem real. A crazy game.

In fact, it might be a game manifesting in ways that are all too
real:

"... QAnon was behaving precisely like an alternate-reality game, or
ARG.

"ARGs are designed to be clue-cracking, multiplatform scavenger
hunts. They're often used as a promotion, like for a movie. A studio
plants a cryptic clue in the world around us. If you notice it and
Google it, it leads to hundreds more clues that the gamemaker has
craftily embedded in various websites, online videos, maps, and even
voice message boxes. The first big ARG—called The Beast—was created
in 2001 to promote the Steven Spielberg movie A.I. Artificial
Intelligence and began with a reference to a “sentient machine
therapist” in the credits listed on the movie poster."

<https://www.wired.com/story/qanon-most-dangerous-multiplatform-game/>

In an era of media saturation and devoted consumption of fictional
narrative, perhaps some percentage of the populace has lost track of
reality and fallen into a fiction, an alternate reality cultivated
and catalyzed by a game show host who became an accidental
president. Or a game show host who has been playing the part of
president as an extension of his "Apprentice" act... the members of
his administration competing for his approval, many of those fired
(and many others choosing to leave).

I can't help but wonder if the crowd storming the Capitol had any
sense of the seriousness of their actions. Did they think they were
playing a game?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #74 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 06:20

    
Well, that was edifying: there's been a counter-coup that cut Trump
and his minions off at the knees.

I had it figured that a failed coup would surely be followed by some
kind of purge, but I didn't get it that it would come from a united
front of Twitter, Facebook, Apple, Youtube, Reddit, Twitch, Discord
and Shopify.

Nothing visible from Amazon, but Amazon is the Washington Post and
has long been a Trump mortal enemy.  Microsoft is making discreet
noises like they at least heard about what was up.

Somebody -- who?--  got all these tech players on the same page and
launched a simultaneous attack without a single rumor leaking
beforehand.

There's no way they didn't clear this beforehand with the incoming
Biden Administration, so there must have been some damned
interesting Zoom calls.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #75 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 06:21

    

Given that the couuntercoup maestros have created this new united
front, I don't see any reason whatever to stop this coalition. 
We're looking at a Biden New Establishment here, some kind of
semi-formalized digital technocracy.

The ethnonationals are gonna be furious, for that's their stock in
trade, but as the new reality seeps in, I think they'll be
increasingly afraid.  There aren't many traditionally-Republican
corporate sponsors who are gonna want to fund the political enemies
of Big Tech, by far the richest companies in the world.  Why would
they want to get into that fight for the sake of QAnon?

The oil majors are gonna hate this, because they went all-in on
Trump, they were literally his State Department, and they're
extremely keen on blood-for-oil skullduggery.  I don't doubt they
could overthrow the Democratic Party, but overthrowing Big Tech when
they've circled the wagons and become the Dukes of Bidenistan, that
prospect looks nasty.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #76 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 06:23

    

It was the Left who were supposed to become the Techlash contingent,
but the loathsome Senators Cruz and Hawley immediately grabbed that
torch away from them, and these two coup-meisters are so dangerous
and disgusting that nobody is gonna want to help them out.

So instead of losing Section 230, a goal that Trump was ready to
defund the Pentagon to achieve, we're gonna get some kinda
double-down Section 460, a digital new-deal that pretends to
regulate the tech majors but also formalizes their power.  

I don't think that Big Tech wanted this, they'd much prefer to be
left alone to mint cash in their surveillance silos, but Trump's
bloody radicalism has forced their hands. Either they kiss, make up
and divvy up the turf, or they're gonna get pecked to death by
loony-right QAnon fascist squadrons.  So their time has come to
stand up; it's pretty much them or nobody.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #77 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 06:24

    

Also, it's not enough the Trumpista gang have been hacked and
suddenly fallen silent; some of them are gonna have to go to jail. 
I don't know who's gonna hound them and how, but there's gonna be a
lot of sticks.  And, also, I'd be guessing, some pretty big carrots.
These new Dukes of Cyberspace will need to shower some of their gold
on the restive population.   They need to make the new dispensation
look likable because, considered objectively, it's like 1984 on
steroids.

This development seems kinda sudden, but it's one of the least weird
political developments I've seen in a long time.  It's a different
ruling class, but it's a reasonable and plausible ruling class that
goes where the money, power and brains are, so who knows, just maybe
they'll actually be able to govern the USA.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #78 of 250: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Sat 9 Jan 21 07:44

    
How does that jibe with the assertion that surveillance is BS? The
technocracy is all about surveillance. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #79 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 21 08:15

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 9 Jan 21 08:15>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #80 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 9 Jan 21 08:15

    
<echodog> I'm not sure how that relates to the previous posts. I
don't think <bruces> is suggesting that Big Tech won't continue to
"mint cash in their surveillance silos," or that the surveillance is
any more okay that it was before. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #81 of 250: ixak (ixak23) Sat 9 Jan 21 08:17

    
> but there's gonna be a lot of sticks.  And, also, I'd be guessing,
some pretty big carrots. These new Dukes of Cyberspace will need to
shower some of their gold on the restive population.   They need to
make the new dispensation look likable because, considered
objectively, it's like 1984 on steroids.



This has been underway within YouTube for quite some time. The
strange inevitability of youtube's machine-learning algorithms to
channel "next video" rabbit holes towards strange homemade
conspiratorial/holocaust-denialism/white nationalist monologues has
been a puzzle and a challenge for their team for several years. 

In 2019 they took steps to ban holocaust denial videos outright, but
the homebrew radicalization original content of Q-anon and its
related factions has been driving massive levels of engagement (i.e.
revenue) on their site, putting them in a bind over whether to kill
the golden goose, or wait for it to kill them. Because original
content earns higher levels of engagement, the YouTube sales teams
can  target advertising content more narrowly and charge more for
it. Throughout 2020 they've been trying different ways of throttling
down on traffic flow towards the unhinged sector, and encouraging
traffic towards more "legitimate" institutions, though it's
definitely cutting into their profit margins a bit. 

Anyone who's able to generate decent (and non-radicalizing) original
content that earns engagement AND partner with credible institutions
(universities, large businesses, media companies, NGOs, government
agencies, etc) will likely benefit massively from YouTube's efforts
to cultivate non-crazypants moneymaker spaces where they can sell
ad-space without having to get called into senate hearings every six
months.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #82 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 09:21

    
[<jonl> reminded me this morning that I haven't participated here yet,
though I've been following it; the below is adapted from messages I sent to
a private mailing list that Jon and I are both on; I've edited them to
remove material from others on the list who haven't consented to sharing it]

==

Appl and Goog have removed Parler for not having an effective hate-speech
filter.

Do we think there's a "hate speech filter" that:

a) filters a meaningful fraction of hate speech, and

b) does not filter legitimate speech?

Given that we can't make a nudity filter that works (hi, Tumblr) and given
that nudity is a far less contested category that "hate speech," how would
that work?

By all means, if you think Apple and Goog should be evicting Parler, then
take that position. But the idea that Parler's failing is their
unwillingness to invest in a nonexistent technology is an obvious pretense
on Appl/Goog's part.

Some test cases for a software hate-speech filter:

Which of these is hate-speech?

* "The rioters were wearing shirts with an English translation of the motto
over the gates of Auschwitz, 'Arbeit macht frei."

* "We should send you Jew-lovers to Auschwitz where you'll learn the meaning
of 'arbeit macht frei'!"

* "You call me a 'Jew-lover' as though that is a source of shame. Of course
I'm a Jew-lover. After all, I am a Jew, and I love myself."

--

Which of these is hate speech?

* "The Trumpist mob that beset the Black woman in the streets of downtown
Los Angeles used numerous racial slurs, including [racial slur]."

* "The Dems have built an unstoppable coalition backed by [racial slur]s."

* "The senator's account was terminated after it was revealed that he had
posted numerous racially inflammatory statements to the service, including
'The Dems have built an unstoppable coalition backed by [racial slur]s'."

--

Recall that Sarah Jeong asked Jigsaw's leading sentiment analysis tool to
evaluate the hate speech she'd been subjected to, and it identified the
following statement as having the lowest possible rating for aggression:

"Iâ€™m going to rip each one of her hairs out and twist her tits clear off"

https://www.wired.com/2016/09/inside-googles-internet-justice-league-ai-
powered-war-trolls/

==

So sure, condemn Parler, condemn Apple and Google for including them in the
app stores, but please let's not pretend that "hate speech filters" exist as
anything but grifty promises from overcapitalised snake-oil salesmen
flogging their magic beans.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #83 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 09:21

    

Someone reading the above might say that hate-speech filters are imperfect,
but they could act as an early warning signal, alerting human moderators who
can exercise judgment over speech.

That may be true, but there's not much evidence of it. Facebook and Twitter
notoriously and routinely overblock the TARGETS of hate speech for repeating
the things they've been called, or just for venting about the people who've
targeted them) and let obvious hate-speech through.

The lack of a crisp definition of "hate speech" is a big part of the
problem. For all intents and purposes "hate speech" is indistinguishable
from "speech that is almost-but-not-quite-hate-speech."

That means that if the platforms publish a definition of "hate speech," the
most dedicated producers of hate speech will produce an endless torrent of
almost-but-not-quite-hate-speech, which will be experienced as hate speech
by its targets.

Worse: dedicated trolls will use their encylopedic knowledge of hate speech
rules to goad their targets into uttering hate-speech and then demand that
their targets be removed from the system.

This is not hypothetical: it's how the state sponsored trolls in Cambodia
operate, and they have used it to completely neutralize the opposition that
mounted a nearly successful election campaign in 2013.

https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/meghara/facebook-cambodia-democracy

There's some evidence that Cambodia's state trolls are actual private
contractors, which means that you can buy goad-hate-speech-targets-into-ToS-
violations as a service.

So what if the tech platforms instructed their moderators to remove things
that fit the hate speech definition AND anything that was *almost* hate
speech?

We know what that looks like: The "I know it when I see it" standard,
combined with huge numbers of moderators with a range of sensibilities and
common sense, leads to things like a World of Warcraft moderator shutting
down an LGBTQ-friendly guild for "provoking hate speech" by "inflammatorily"
advertising that its members are queer and
allies.

https://arstechnica.com/uncategorized/2006/02/6129-2/

This isn't a counsel of despair. We can have speech policies that work, but
they work at the scale of a community, not a global service.

BTW, If you're looking for a set of moderation principles written by
marginalized people who have been the targets of hate-speech, check out the
Santa Clara Principles, which articulate a human rights framework for
content removal and moderation:

https://santaclaraprinciples.org/
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #84 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 09:22

    
Does that mean that Goog and Appl shouldn't have taken action against
Parler? Not at all.

I am all for platforms (including app stores) having a variety of speech
policies. After all, I expect different speech standards when I'm tucking my
daughter in at night, when I'm in a professional meeting, when I'm having a
conversation around a campfire, and when I'm in a political debate. I want
to have a variety of conversational spaces that I can choose among based on
my preferences about the suitability of the house rules to the context of
the discourse I want to have.

The problem with the app stores is that a shameful, four decade, bipartisan
neglect of antitrust enforcement has contracted the possible universe of
speech policies for mobile apps into two hands, and neither store has been a
good steward of that power. Both routinely block apps for stupid reasons. I
don't expect Appl or Goog to stop making mistakes, and I am not confident
that they'll make fewer mistakes.

Rather than focusing on making Appl and Goog more successful at content
removal (something I'm in no position to do), I want to focus on making
their failures less consequential, by encouraging competition in app stores
and by legalizing adversarial interoperability, so that members of the
public who are badly served by Appl and Goog's speech policies have a remedy
apart from "complaining" and "suing" -- that remedy is "choosing someone
else's moderation policies," which, in a technical
sense, generally means "sideloading."

Sideloading (for Appl devices) requires legalizing violations of terms of
service (CFAA), bypassing TPMs (DMCA 1201), reimplementing APIs (Oracle v
Google*), and other legally fraught activities.

https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/10/adversarial-interoperability

Like the pandemic, Parler is revealing the latent fragility of our systems.
Parler is vulnerable to takedown by a duopoly of app stores, by a oligopoly
of cloud providers, by a tiny coterie of payment processors.

I hate Parler and would be delighted to see it consigned to the dustbin of
history, but I know that my political adversaries (the entities behind
Parler) are perfectly capable of bringing the same pressures to bear against
services I like - app stores already routinely block apps for stupid
reasons, such as alleged "progressive bias."

It's reasonable to say that Parler should use a mix of automated tools and
human judgment to block unlawful speech and/or hate speech - but it's NOT
the reason that Appl/Goog have removed it. Both companies have made it clear
in their public communications that Parler must install an effective hate-
speech filter to qualify for inclusion in their stores.

I hope we can all agree that "effective hate-speech filter" is a nonexistent
technology, and that therefore none of the existing services whose apps
appear in either app store have such a technology in place.

I don't think this means the companies should do nothing. If Apple and
Google want to remove Parler because they think it's terrible, they should
say so: "We have removed Parler because we think it is a politically suspect
project intended to foment violence. That judgment is primarily subjective
and may be wielded against other
platforms in future. If you don't like our judgment, you shouldn't use our
app store."

I'm 100% OK with that: first, because it is honest; and second, because it
invites the question, "How do we switch app stores?"

Cory
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #85 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 9 Jan 21 11:24

    
Does Trump's threat to repeal Section 230 make sense? If that were
done the big media companies would immediately evict Trump and his
boosters to keep them from posting things that would cause the
companies to be sued.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #86 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 11:56

    
Only if you don't mind shutting down the WELL the same day. There definitely
isn't enough money in this shoestring op to let people post stuff if The
WELL is to be held liable for what they post. But Facebook'll be fine - they
have more mods than then entire headcount at Twitter.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #87 of 250: shannon (vsclyne) Sat 9 Jan 21 13:54

    
I wouldn't worry about the Well. Postings are mainly only readable
by its members; and it doesn't have enough members for anyone in
authority to be concerned with. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #88 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 14:52

    
You've misunderstood the nature of the risk: CDA230 insulates platforms from
civil liability - that is, a pissed off WELL user suing the WELL over
something another WELL user said. If you don't think WELL users are capable
of getting angry enough at one another to sue each other, you need to read
some different forums.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #89 of 250: shannon (vsclyne) Sat 9 Jan 21 15:06

    
I understand your point, but I judge the risk to be vanishingly
small.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #90 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 9 Jan 21 15:39

    
It's silly to make this about the Well.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #91 of 250: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 9 Jan 21 16:35

    
Of course it's about the WELL. It's about every single forum for online
speech, from Kickstarter to Yelp, from The WELL to your PTA mailing list.
They would literally be unable to function if they were jointly liable for
their users' speech.

As to "vanishingly small" - WELL users have REPEATEDLY threatened legal
acation agains one another over things they said to one another (some have
even served notice on one another). Do you think that the service has
undergone some transformation that has made the users of this service less
prone to anger at one another? How would (or could) the WELL vet potential
new signups to determine whehter they would name the service as a party to
any suits in the event that another WELL user made them angry enough to sue?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #92 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 9 Jan 21 18:26

    
Donald Trumo isn't demanding repeal to strike out at the WeLL. Who
put that bug in his ear, and why? It would be bad for him
personally.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #93 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Sat 9 Jan 21 18:38

    
He probably doesn't have a card good for $15, or he could check it
out himself. Maybe he can get a pre-paid?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #94 of 250: Andrew Alden (alden) Sat 9 Jan 21 19:42

    
Cory is right. Well members have done some memorably reprehensible things to
each other over the years, just not lately.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #95 of 250: Gail Williams (gail) Sat 9 Jan 21 20:46

    
CDA230 is the legal underpinning that makes the Well's business
possible.
 
I don't have a management role here anymore, but I can't begin to
imagine the scramble to find out if private insurance companies
would step up and how much they would charge. Managers and owners
being able to roll their eyes at assertions of libel makes all
forum-conversation space viable. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #96 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 9 Jan 21 21:26

    
It looks like Amazon has a bigger (if temporary) ban-hammer than the
other big tech firms, because Parler runs on AWS. Not for long.

Amazon is kicking Parler off its web hosting service
Parler’s CEO said the site could be offline for up to a week
https://www.theverge.com/2021/1/9/22222637/amazon-workers-aws-stop-hosting-ser
vices-parler-capitol-violence

So if they want to stay up, they will need to find another hosting
service and a CDN big enough to absorb the inevitable
denial-of-service attacks. I wonder if Cloudflare would do it?

But I wonder a bit why Trump's minions didn't have a blog ready to
go. His fans would find it and syndicate it everywhere for him, and
the press would feel obligated to read it and report on it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #97 of 250: Michael D. Sullivan (avogadro) Sat 9 Jan 21 21:47

    
I'd say it's dead, not just off for a week.  Migrating from AWS to
another host (if one can be found in the US) will be a major
operation.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #98 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 9 Jan 21 21:57

    
Portability is possible but it depends very much on the details of
their software stack. Parler's CEO claims they planned ahead, but
who knows, maybe it's just talk.

re: <74> I don't see why big tech would need a Zoom call. All they
needed was a Schelling point, and they got a big, obvious one. They
don't need to coordinate any further, any more than airlines need to
coordinate privately to match prices. The info they need is public.

Also, I'm thinking all the bosses had to do was finally give in to
the activist contingent of their mostly-liberal employees who have
been advocating for this sort of thing since before Trump got in.
It's probably pretty good for morale, overall, and after being under
siege (culturally) for years, they could use a morale-booster.
(Their minority of closeted Trumpist employees might be glum about
it, though.)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #99 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 22:11

    
Yeah, it's very much about the WELL, or at least, what history has
done with the legacy of the WELL. The Electronic Frontier's just not
a frontier now, it's densely settled, it's got all kinds of wealth
and infrastructure to quarrel over, and it's got a blooming plethora
of economic, legal, social and ethical problems.

I'm not that upset about it.  Problems are inherent in the human
condition.  It's good that we're recognizing that the richest
companies in the world really are the richest and most influential
enterprises in the world and not kinda purple-haze cyberspace ivory
towers.  It's realpolitik and it's much healthier than QAnon
delusion.

The WELL really was a purple-haze cyberspace ivory tower for quite a
while, I can fondly remember how thrilling that was, but nowadays it
is what it is, which is a funky little mom-and-pop legacy-media
niche.  That's what the passage of time does, it's the nature of
history and futurity, there's a melancholy beauty to it.  You
shouldn't whine about it any more than you ought to wring your hands
about the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #100 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 9 Jan 21 22:12

    
Meanwhile, it's snowing like crazy in the country of the Tiny
Spaniard.  A major-league Greenhouse blizzard has blown in and
people are skiing on the snowdrifts in Madrid.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #101 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 9 Jan 21 22:39

    
re: <84> remember that a forum or social network doesn't need any
mobile apps at all. A website will do. Browsers are getting more
capable all the time. It's nice for engagement, though. Does anyone
know how much Parler's mobile apps were used versus their website?

Browsers do have built-in content-blocking, but so far it's for
malware and various annoyances. The major browser vendors haven't
used it to block any websites for hate speech, I don't think?

There are a lot of moves and counter-moves here, depending on their
technical chops and persistence. Sci-Hub gets the worst of it due to
copyright law but it seems they're hanging in there?

But assuming they survive from a technical standpoint, they will
then face the internal contradictions of a mostly-unmoderated forum
that takes a free-speech stance. It seems hard to make a forum
attractive to more than adolescents when you have lots of people
gleefully posting garbage and are also ideologically opposed to
doing anything about it? Trump would probably consider it low-class.

I wonder a bit what the Free Republic is up to, but not enough to
check it out.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #102 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 01:18

    
<bslesins> My unchecked understanding is that Parler users are
primarily mobile. But I don't know why users couldn't sustain their
activity via the web interface, assuming they have hosting. (I heard
earlier that AWS was ending their hosting relationship.)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #103 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 01:51

    
Our "State of the World" conversation in 2021 is US-centric, our
attention focused on the emerging, so far mostly cold civil war in
the USA. As Bruce says, there's a blizzard in Spain, the polar
vortex is outta whack. As I type this Pakistan is dark, a power
outage. Covid-19 is spiking in China and elsewhere in the world, and
an Indonesian Sriwijaya Air flight has crashed into the Java Sea.
Kim Jong-Un is crowing about boosting North Korea's nuclear
capability - not unusual for that guy, though.

But the USA has everyone beat. Trumpistan has come to a head,
explosively. Trump has seized and leveraged wild political energies
that no one had taken seriously before, and given power to movements
that politics had largely ignored, like the crazy cousin that nobody
wanted to admit was part of the family. And there was a viral
mainstreaming of crazy over the last few years, spreading in much
the way we've seen Covid spreading. The disease is a metaphor for
the psychic disturbance. And I don't mean to be dismissive: this
wouldn't be happening if those crazy energies didn't resonate with
something in the sould of America. 

But we're in uncharted waters here: we had one Civil War, and a
history of contention, but nothing quite as wild as we're seeing
today.

What woke me up in the middle of the night (it's 3:30AM here) was a
thought about the upcoming inauguration. It probably should be held
in some bunker, but I don't think that's going to happen.

My fear, given the storming of the Capitol and rumblings within
Trumpistan since that event, is that thousands of armed
insurrectionists will show up for the inauguration. And that, aided
by sympathetic law enforcement and military, they'll storm whatever
barricades are erected there. How far will they go? 

Of course, those planning the inauguration are thinking about this,
too:
<https://www.politico.com/news/2021/01/07/inauguration-security-capitol-siege-4
56244> “'You can imagine the inauguration will have Fort Knox-level security, with just the people who need to be there,' a source close to Biden told POLITICO after the mobs stormed the Capitol."

Reassuring? I'm still uneasy about it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #104 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 21 04:18

    <scribbled by bruces Sun 10 Jan 21 04:19>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #105 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 21 04:22

    
Meanwhile, on Parler

#Trump2Q2Q
#Q
#1A
#2A
#KAG
#HCQ
#1776
#Parler
#MAGA
#RedPill
#QAnon
&#8232;#VoterID
#Rumble
#Patriots
#Treason 
#Kracken
&#8232;#NoMasks
#FUCKblm
#PedoGate
#FightBack
#Revolution
 
#GODWINS
#PizzaGate
#ProudBOYS
#TrumpWon
&#8232;#TrumpTrain
#VoterFraud
#ChemTrails
#LockHerUp
&#8232;#FuckWOKE
#FUCKantifa
#WWG1WGA
#ObamaGate
#AmericaFirst
&#8232;#911InsideJob
#WeThePeople
&#8232;#STOPtheSteal
#FUCKtheNWO
#SupportTrump
#Adrenochrome 

#DigitalSoldiers
#ElectionFRAUD
#PatriotsUNITED
#MarchForTrump
#GoogleExposed
#BikersForTrump
&#8232;#ResistTheReset
#MarchForTrump
#DrainTheRINO’S
#DrainTheSwamp
&#8232;#SaveOurChildren
#BigTechMonopoly
#BidenCrimeFamily
#TruckersForTrump
&#8232;#MailinFraudBallots
#ClintonCrimeFamily
#ThesePeopleAreEvil
&#8232;#TheGreatAwakening
#WeAreTheNewsNOW
#Trump2Q2QLandslide
&#8232;#DemocratCriminalCabal
&#8232;@theproudboys 
@teamtrump
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #106 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 10 Jan 21 04:23

    
The richest people in the world, 2021 AD


1. Elon Musk
2. Jeff Bezos
3. Bill Gates
4. Bernard Arnault
5. Mark Zuckerberg
6. Zhong Shanshan
7. Warren Buffett
8. Larry Page
9. Sergey Brin
10. Larry Ellison
11. Steve Ballmer
12. F. Bettencourt Meyers
13. Mukesh Ambani
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #107 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 10 Jan 21 05:43

    
Cory I think you're completely right about the duplicitousness of
that stated reason, and how it obscures both the true reasoning and
the technical difficulties involved in moderating these platforms
(not to mention the cost in trauma to human moderators). Figuring
out the limits of responsible social media is crucial and to do that
we need clear terminology and honesty about the practicality of it.

(also, I cannot get over the audacity of Hawley wanting to title a
book "The Tyranny of Big Tech," both because of the use of tyranny
for something other than what he enables and because of all the
excellent, rigorous existing scholarship on the question.)

Amid all this deplatforming joy, though, I come back to Fox News and
talk radio. Yes, there are specific dangers to social media
platforms, particularly in terms of organizing. But in terms of size
of audience and initial brainscrubbing, Fox and Rush et al must be
at least as culpable and dangerous. Moreover, figuring out how to
regulate or moderate television might be a useful step in doing the
same for social media. How do you determine what is hate speech on
talk radio, or more importantly what might not qualify as hate
speech but forms a long-term project of disassociation and
brainwashing, could provide some parameters? 

I tend to lean towards structural considerations to begin with:
looking at the corporate architecture that allows for coordinated
echoes on seemingly different platforms and insulates the people
making the money from the damage they do. But what about
responsibility for actual content, at a minimum for content labelled
"news"?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #108 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 10 Jan 21 06:50

    
Meanwhile, I keep coming back to that quote from the Georgia call
(so, so long ago), in which the evidence for the claim of voting
fraud was the size of the rallies. It's obviously ludicrous to
extrapolate that many orders of magnitude, but it still brings us
back to Jon's point at the beginning about lived vs mediated
experience, and people's ability and willingness to grasp the kinds
of orders of magnitude involved in national voting (or national
vaccination, or anything else). 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #109 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 06:58

    
In the mid-1980s I met former FCC Commissioner Nicholas Johnson at a
party. He was expressing his concern about the evolution of media
control of the political sphere, pretty much predicting what became
reality: the impact of talk radio and political media organizations
like Fox News and MSNBC. His concerns were about big media
consolidation and the elimination of the Fairness Doctrine, which
still existed but was eliminated soon after. I.e. he was prescient.
Nobody was talking about the Internet as a media platform back then,
and social media wasn't on the radar (except maybe with somebody
like McLuhan - I recall studying in the early 70s about McLuhan's
"media matrix" concept).

The elimination of the Fairness Doctrine is a long and interesting
story: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FCC_fairness_doctrine> "The
Fairness Doctrine has been strongly opposed by prominent
conservatives and libertarians who view it as an attack on First
Amendment rights and property rights."

People who call themselves "conservatives" have used media power and
political manipulation to take and hold power in decades since,
culminating in the election as president of a corrupt developer and
game show host who, despite being self-serving and apolitical,
aligned himself with their interests. And one of their strategies is
to claim that the various forms of media disfavor them, so they can
eliminate any egalitarian controls that might work against their
interests. Hence complaints about "liberal media bias."

I mention this to support Malka's last post. And Cory's position
that what appears to be an issue with "media" or "big tech" should
really be addressed as a problem of monopoly and consolidation.

I realize this post is pretty dry. I may be losing my sense of
humor. <grin>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #110 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 10 Jan 21 07:07

    
oh .... we were supposed to be funny?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #111 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 07:10

    
Not necessarily, but this is kind of funny: Clarence Thomas is
trending on Twitter. His wife Ginni was apparently involved with the
Capitol-storming MAGA mob in some way, so people are calling for him
to step down.  And suggesting that he be replaced with Anita Hill.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #112 of 250: mbrubaker (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 07:33

    
Via email from mbrubaker:

Since we're on big tech, here's an article showing Amazon, Facebook,
and Google's (among others) contributions to the Republican
Attorneys General Association, whose ~Rule of Law Defense Fund~
placed robocalls to mobilize attendees for Wednesday's rally:
<https://documented.net/2021/01/republican-attorneys-general-dark-money-group-o
rganized-protest-preceding-capitol-mob-attack/>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #113 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 07:35

    
Via email from George Mokray:

"And any one person's perception of reality should be taken with a
block of salt.”

One of the words I am trying to eliminate from my vocabulary is
“truth.”  It’s too big a concept to get my arms around and entirely
dependent upon perspective and point of view. What you see is
determined by where you stand and how good your eyes are.  I am
comfortable with only a carpenter’s truth - when something is
straight, level, and plumb, then it is true.

Other words I am wary of include “honor,” “hope,” and, increasingly,
“deserve.”

And, after nearly 40 years of practicing martial arts, I’m pissed
off about the continuous use of “fight,” “fighting,” and all war
references while talking about confronting problems or setting
policy.  These words set up a conflict with an enemy when actually
neither conflict nor enemy may be there.  COVID19 is not in conflict
with the humans it infects and is not an enemy because it’s not even
really alive or capable of thought or even aware of us except for
maybe the ACE-2 receptors on our cells.

We have confused the literary trick of the pathetic fallacy with
what’s happening around us.  For instance, when I hear someone say,
“Oh, it’s terrible day” because the weather is stormy or cold or wet
or all three, I sometimes respond with “You shouldn’t take the
weather personally.  It has no idea who you are.”

Lew Welch, the poet, wrote: 
Why do women take everything personally?
Oh, I never do, she replied.

Lew Welch was a mid-20th century Beatnik poet sexist and it’s not
just women who take everything personally.  We all do.  After all,
we’re persons.  It’s the only way we can take things.

At least, at first.

PS:  Lew Welch is a very, very good poet who still has important
things to say to us.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #114 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 07:56

    
Science fiction author Christopher Brown, a friend I met through our
mutual acquaintance with <bruces>, posts regular observations of the
natural world in his "Field Notes." From his most recent:

"It’s a heartening thing, seeing a swath of country beginning to go
back to wild after a century and a half of agricultural subjugation.
It’s a sobering thing, when you consider the extent to which those
changes to more leisurely uses of the land reflect the slow-motion
failure of the family farm-based economic system on which the
country was founded. And the cultural consequences, as the townships
into which the land was carved by the surveyors in the 1840s for
settlement by pioneers and veterans become the playgrounds of
wealthy people from elsewhere. Good for the land, bad for the
people."

<https://edgelands.substack.com/p/midwinter-in-the-tropic-of-kansas>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #115 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 08:47

    
“don’t kid yourself, the abstract nouns are going to get away with
it again, not a single abstract noun is going to face jail time” -
@literalbanana

The words “right” and “accountable” are on my personal suspicious
characters list, and I’m also suspicious of adjectives for promoting
binary thinking.

But social media is built on hyperbole. Many people communicate in
clickbait headlines these days. Tweets get shared for their wit and
imitation takes it from there. Speaking in blanket statements and
stereotypes is very woke.

I guess we should talk about the spread of misinformation? We often
talk about memes going viral, but this year I have decided to take
the viral metaphor seriously. Thinking like an amateur
epidemiologist, R for most social networks is enormous and instant
resharing makes the exponential growth hard to keep up with. I
sometimes wonder if introducing some delay to when a reshared meme
appears in followers’ timelines might slow things down enough for
the fact-checkers to have a chance of keeping up with the nonsense.

With all the super-spreaders it’s going to be hard to move the
numbers much, though.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #116 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 10 Jan 21 12:38

    
<jonl>, Ginni Thomas is said to have sponsored (paid for?) 80 buses
that brought "demonstrators" to DC for Trump's rally. I guess it's
not just Soros any more.

<https://www.dailykos.com/stories/2021/1/9/2007521/-Ginni-Thomas-Aiding-Abettin
g-the-Capitol-Insurrection>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #117 of 250: Gary Gach (ggg) Sun 10 Jan 21 14:11

    
When I grew up, America was the greatest country in motion picture
history. In just 4 years, it's become a country with television as
its president, and, just skimming the Bruce's hashtag harvest, one
of the weirdest in social media history. 

If any truth & reconciliation process is to go forward, thru what
media shall it be? Neighborhood town halls with local plus big tech
sponsors?  If so, I'm down with that, and happy to organize in my
city – whenever that might be in the offing.  Any ideas ?
 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #118 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 14:14

    
It seems Parler is having more trouble. Deadline quotes the CEO from
an interview on Fox News:

> “They made an attempt to not only kill the app, but to actually
destroy the entire company. And it’s not just these three companies.
Every vendor from text message services to email providers to our
lawyers all ditched us too on the same day.”

> “We’re going to try our best to get back online as quickly as
possible. But we’re having a lot of trouble because every vendor we
talk to says they won’t work with us. Because if Apple doesn’t
approve and Google doesn’t approve, they won’t.”

https://deadline.com/2021/01/parler-ceo-says-service-dropped-by-every-vendor-a
nd-could-end-the-company-1234670607/
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #119 of 250: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Sun 10 Jan 21 15:01

    
I'm having trouble geing upset.   Rebeckah Mercer can afford the hit.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #120 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 15:24

    
Stripe Stops Processing Payments for Trump Campaign Website
https://www.wsj.com/articles/stripe-stops-processing-payments-for-trump-campai
gn-website-11610319116

Shopify too. I wonder if any actual banks will pile on?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #121 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 10 Jan 21 15:26

    
Seeing that PGA is apparently removing golf tournaments from the
comemierda's golf courses, which brings me back to our earlier
discussion about companies and brands. I am thinking about "soft
power" as unconnected to nationality - since the nation-state is not
the most useful level of analysis for most of our conflicts today
anyway. In a situation where the institutions and norms of formal
authority have eroded, is the soft power of being excluded from
events of cultural significance; losing followers; being criticized
at restaurants; being mocked by brand social media managers; more
powerful (certainly quicker) than formal censure?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #122 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 18:14

    
> 9. Cyberwar; global tension, destablilization, confusion and and
unrest.

I went to check what's going on with Solarwinds and didn't find much
that's new, but this seems worth bringing up:

WikiLeaks successor DDoSecrets has amassed a controversial new
collection of corporate secrets and is sharing them in the name of
transparency.
https://www.wired.com/story/ddosecrets-ransomware-leaks/

> Beyond just encrypting victim machines and demanding a payment for
the decryption keys, ransomware hackers now often steal vast
collections of victim data and threaten to post it online unless
their hacking targets pay. In many cases, the victims refuse that
extortion, and the cybercriminals follow through on their threat.
The result is dozens or even hundreds of terabytes of internal
corporate data, spilled out onto dark web servers whose web
addresses are passed around among hackers and security researchers.

[...]

> In June of this year [2020], DDoSecrets published its own
bombshell collection of hacked documents, a massive collection of
law enforcement files known as BlueLeaks, given to the group by a
hacker associated with Anonymous. The 269-gigabyte collection of
documents from 200 state and local police organizations led Twitter
to ban the DDoSecrets account and even block all tweets containing
links to its website. Reddit banned the r/blueleaks subreddit.
Shortly afterward, German prosecutors in the town of Zwickau ordered
police to seize a server belonging to DDoSecrets that hosted many of
its files and the search engine for its data collection, a
significant setback for the group from which it's still working to
recover. It now plans to host its data on Tor-protected .onion sites
that hide the location of servers, making such seizures far more
difficult in the future.

> Despite those hurdles, DDoSecrets remains undeterred in its larger
mission. With its new ransomware trove, it's also tapped into a huge
new source of leaks. Just last year, more than 1,000 ransomware
victims had their data spilled onto dark web sites, according to
Recorded Future's Liska. He estimates that one year of ransomware
leaks alone adds up to between 100 and 200 terabytes of stolen data
posted to various dark web sites.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #123 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 18:36

    
The talk about abolishing police seems to have died down for some
reason? Maybe we're clearer now on why we need them, but
contradictions remain and it's still a huge mess.

I am a bit vague on Buzzfeed's reliability but this is quite the
story:

Two Black officers told BuzzFeed News that their chief and other
upper management left them totally unprepared and were nowhere to be
found on the day.
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/emmanuelfelton/black-capitol-police-racis
m-mob

> The officer even described coming face to face with police
officers from across the country in the mob. He said some of them
flashed their badges, telling him to let them through, and trying to
explain that this was all part of a movement that was supposed to
help.

> “You have the nerve to be holding a blue lives matter flag, and
you are out there fucking us up,” he told one group of protestors he
encountered inside the Capitol. “[One guy] pulled out his badge and
he said, ‘we’re doing this for you.’ Another guy had his badge. So I
was like, ‘well, you gotta be kidding.’”

> Another officer, a newer recruit, echoed these sentiments, saying
that where he was on the steps to the rotunda on the east side of
the Capitol, he was engaged in hand-to-hand battles trying to fight
the attackers off. But he said they were outnumbered 10 to one, and
described extraordinary scenes in which protesters holding Blue
Lives Matter flags launched themselves at police officers.

> “We were telling them to back up and get away and stop, and
they’re telling us, they are on our side, and they’re doing this for
us, and they’re saying this as I’m getting punched in my face by one
of them … That happened to a lot of us. We were getting pepper
sprayed in the face by those protesters, I'm not going to even call
them protestors, by those domestic terrorists,” said the officer.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #124 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 10 Jan 21 19:49

    
Now the banks are piling on too.

Goldman, JPMorgan, Citi Suspend Political Donations
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-01-10/marriott-suspends-donations
-to-senators-who-opposed-vote-result

> Goldman is still formulating its measures that will probably
curtail future political giving to the elected leaders who fought to
overturn the 2020 result. A representative for the firm confirmed
the plan. JPMorgan, the largest U.S. bank by assets, said it’s
planning a six-month suspension to both Republicans and Democrats.
Citigroup said it intends to temporarily stop all political
contributions in the current quarter.

[...]

> The action from the banks followed an earlier announcement from
Marriott International Inc., which said it will suspend donations to
Republican senators who voted against certifying President-elect Joe
Biden, after considering the “destructive events” on Wednesday.

[...]

> Marriott is closely tied to Utah Senator Mitt Romney, a former
board member and a vocal critic of Trump. Romney’s connection to
Marriott predates his service on the board: his given name, Willard,
was in honor of J. Willard Marriott, a friend of the 2012 Republican
presidential nominee’s father and founder of the hotel company.

If you’re wondering whether corporations control everything, this
is... probably not a good test? It seems like they are being
reactive, following election and riot results here?

I wonder if they will close any accounts?

I guess the QAnon conspiracy theorists spin faster? Or is it just
more raw material?

I feel like I’m posting too much. Sorry about that, I’ll take a
break.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #125 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 10 Jan 21 20:43

    
It's good info, our challenge is to make sense of it.

There appears to be a fine line between "we're doing this in the
interest of transparency" and "we really want to fuck you up."

And there also appears to be a fine line between "we're doing this
to help you" and "we're here to burn it down." 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #126 of 250: Alan Fletcher (af) Sun 10 Jan 21 22:02

    <scribbled by af Sun 10 Jan 21 22:04>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #127 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Sun 10 Jan 21 22:04

    
[ scribble : The well has no edit-a-post ...  clarification ]


There was never (ISTR) any talk of abolishing Police forces.

DE-funding is the wrong concept.

RE-funding (for short) is closer ... (RELIEF-funding for long)   ..
relieving them of all the mental illness/social services foo that
Reagan et al
dumped on them. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #128 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Mon 11 Jan 21 01:14

    
Cutting political donations seems like an attempt to control, a bit
of stick (or more accurately removal of carrot). But hopefully it
will set a precedent and raise the question of why banks are
donating (and to both parties) in the first place...
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #129 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 21 03:46

    
Those Christopher Brown Field Notes are genuinely moving and
insightful.  He's long been interested in the pastoral aspects of
science fiction, but during a pandemic lockdown, as he's wandering
in almost a John Muir fashion through these empty lots in a
fast-growing city, there's a compelling nonfiction sense-of-wonder
to his diaristic experiences.

It's like early '70s Whole Earth hippie-back-to-the-landism, but
rehearsed all over again under Anthropocene skies.  Chris Brown
doesn't have enough disciples to be a subgenre yet, but if I was a
young science fiction writer I'd be paying a lot of attention to
this.


<https://edgelands.substack.com/p/midwinter-in-the-tropic-of-kansas>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #130 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 21 06:00

    <scribbled by bruces Mon 11 Jan 21 08:35>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #131 of 250: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 21 06:03

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

>>>  The talk about abolishing police seems to have died down for
some reason?

Give it time, the people talking with much concern and furrowed
brows about abolishing police have got a bit of a backlist of other
pressing issues that they really need to misrepresent right now.

So worry not. I am absolutely sure that multitudes of pundits
fishing for clicks shall shortly resume misrepresenting the ‘defund
the police’ people as the ‘abolish the police’ people, as soon as
they have drawn enough Nero point energy from the moral vacuum in
order to continue the conflation.

One thing that has those folk kinda busy right now, with all the
festive spirit of a tribe of incestuous cannibals who have just
discovered a hidden and extensive branch on the family tree, is
trying to find anyone amongst Trump’s acolytes who can potentially
be accused of being an anti fascist infiltrator. Ashli Babbitt,
being usefully far too dead to argue, is currently receiving most of
the finger pointing on that, from what I have seen, but I am sure
they’ll extend the accusations to some of the living in fairly short
order.

That said, given that the crowd did pretty much exactly what they
were told to do by the President, as well as by some police and some
politicians, I am not sure that pointing the finger at infiltrators
helps all that much. 

I mean, they could have been massively infiltrated by several coach
loads of lost and drunk Australian tourists, and it wouldn’t have
noticeably improved the optics here.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #132 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 21 06:20

    
Fellow Plutopian Suzy Shelor just sent me this link - I had read it
before, and should have linked it when I posted about Q Anon as an
alternate reality game...
<https://medium.com/curiouserinstitute/a-game-designers-analysis-of-qanon-58097
2548be5>

"QAnon grows on the wild misinterpretation of random data, presented
in a suggestive fashion in a milieu designed to help the users come
to the intended misunderstanding. Maybe 'guided apophenia' is a
better phrase. Guided because the puppet masters are directly
involved in hinting about the desired conclusions. They have
pre-seeded the conclusions. They are constantly getting the player
lost by pointing out unrelated random events and creating a meaning
for them that fits the propaganda message Q is delivering.

"There is no reality here. No actual solution in the real world.
Instead, this is a breadcrumb trail AWAY from reality. Away from
actual solutions and towards a dangerous psychological rush. It
works very well because when you 'figure it out yourself' you own
it. You experience the thrill of discovery, the excitement of the
rabbit hole, the acceptance of a community that loves and respects
you. Because you were convinced to 'connect the dots yourself' you
can see the absolute logic of it. This is the conclusion you arrived
at."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #133 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Mon 11 Jan 21 06:44

    
I posted that upstream at <22>, Jon.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #134 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 21 08:31

    
Oh, right - sorry, I knew I had seen it before but didn't think it
was here. I'll leave my post for the excerpt.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #135 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Mon 11 Jan 21 08:34

    
Maybe people will click on it now, post-fiascoup.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #136 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 11 Jan 21 09:25

    
I hope so.

An intelligent and well-informed friend posted a concern that senior
military and law enforcement officials might have been involved in
the  coup attempt, and are still around to do (or support, or look
the other way while others do) more damage.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #137 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 11 Jan 21 09:59

    
So, to be clear I don’t know what the many people who took up the
“abolish the police” slogan (and other, darker slogans) might have
been thinking. I am sitting at home in a pandemic, don’t have any
strong connections into the various parts of social justice
movements, and worse, half of what I read online seems to have been
written by their enemies. It’s not a good way to get a real grip on
the range of opinion in a social movement, and I am not curious
enough to investigate further.

I’m a bit skeptical that anyone could have the perspective needed to
figure it out, beyond their own circle of friends and follower
lists. It seems like surveys might help? But see the article I
posted in <72> for all the ways they can go wrong. So I’m inclined
to distrust the statements of people who speak confidently about
this.

It seems plausible, though, that the people who took up this banner
didn’t all agree on what it means, and that while some were
explaining that it doesn’t mean what it says on the tin, others were
enthusiastically proclaiming that they meant every word?

When we lack evidence we are reduced to comparing priors, talking
about what seems plausible rather than what’s real. In that spirit,
I read a plausible post by some random Redditor that introduced to
me a term, “sanewashing,” for what might happen when there are
extremists and people with more mainstream views in the same
movement.

https://www.reddit.com/r/neoliberal/comments/js84tu/how_did_defund_the_police_
stop_meaning_defund_the/

Maybe that’s just another article written by their enemies, but the
term seems useful.

I would guess there is sanewashing in every broad movement. It’s
probably a good idea not to apologize for or repeat approvingly
other people’s slogans unless you really mean it literally. (Try to
convince the kids of that, though?)

The social media trend towards hyperbole and edginess should be
resisted, though it’s hard and as you can see, I backslide
sometimes. [Stops to delete edgy, distracting paragraph.] It’s a
natural way to write these days, as we imitate headlines and witty
remarks that get reshared widely.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #138 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 11 Jan 21 11:39

    
The European Union has just deployed its first all-European armed
and uniformed service.  They're called "Frontex," and, as one might
expect, they're European border-guards and coast guards.

Their purpose is to beat the bounds of Europe and keep illegals from
getting in.

The Europeans didn't have much taste for a post-national imperial
armed-forces before the USA and Britain both went nuts, but they
seem discreetly pleased about it now.

Also, truck drivers from Britain into Europe are having their ham
sandwiches confiscated by border inspectors.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #139 of 250: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 11 Jan 21 20:29

    
wrt #109 --- nick johnson was a friend of mine. i remember reading
his 1970s works on communications/mass media/privacy/policy --- and
he had it all nailed, then.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #140 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 21 06:01

    
Via email from George Mokray:

What pisses me off most about QAnon is that they are delegitimizing
actual cases of organized pedophilia and ephebophilia, even though
the QAnon Shaman, who is now under arrest for his actions in DC, can
be seen spouting fairly accurate figures about sex slavery and
children on Youtube.  They use just enough factual evidence to make
their wilder conspiracies plausible but the reality gets lost as
they spin out into paranoid fantasy.

Most of the abuse of children and teens comes from “respected”
members of the community like teachers, coaches, doctors, ministers
(priests)….  One of the NYTimes’ best books of the year is Lacy
Crawford's memoir, Notes on a Silencing, about her abuse at St.
Paul's boarding school in New Hampshire.  Great Is the Truth:
Secrecy, Scandal, and the Quest for Justice at the Horace Mann
School by Amos Kamil and Sean Elder details the over 30 years of
abuse by teachers, administrators, and staff at William Barr’s alma
mater.  William's father, Donald Barr, was the principal of the
Dalton School and hired Jeffrey Epstein to teach there.  When the
elder Barr was, evidently, forced out of Dalton he became headmaster
at MY alma mater, the Hackley School, where, I have read, he was
sometimes known as Chester the Molester. 

When I was a 7th grader at Hackley, there was an adjunct teacher
there by the name of Lee Barnes who turned out to have a lifelong
career as a molester.  His come-on was “I can teach you how to fly
an airplane” and he approached me at one point.  Luckily, I smelled
something fishy about this crewcut “macho” guy and declined.  Later,
he ran a summer  flight camp which became his own personal "game
preserve" and was named “flight instructor of the year” by a
national flying organization, partially, I imagine, for his work
there.  To my knowledge, he never spent a moment in jail but he
distorted a lot of young lives.

So this is personal to me.

Then there is Denny Hastert, former Speaker of the House, now in
prison, and Rep Jim Jordan who is credibly accused of turning a
blind eye when he was a collegiate wrestling coach to the abuse of
wrestlers by the team physician.  And there’s this NYTimes story
about another well-known sports doctor who abused UMich football
players for years:
<https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/25/sports/ncaafootball/michigan-football-sex-a
buse.html>
And then there’s Dr Larry Nassar who abused so many US Olympic
gymnasts.  And Jerry Sandusky.  And…..

Jimmy Savile of the BBC was real as was Rolf Harris, who was doing
more than tying kangaroos down.  If you really want to get the
willies, read about the abuse on the Isle of Jersey at children’s
homes there: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jul/03/haut-de-la-garenne-house-of-ho
rror-investigation-brought-jersey-abuse-to-light>

But now I sound like a conspiracy theorist.  Thanks QAnon.

Fact is, Marc Dutroux, the child sex pimp and multiple murderer who
helped collapse the Belgian government in the 1990s, was real too. 
Some of the most important political and business figures in Belgium
had dealings with him.  I’d still like to know if Jeffrey Epstein
and Robert or Ghislaine Maxwell ever had anything to do with Dutroux
as they all were active at the same time.  Odd that I’ve never seen
Dutroux’s name come up in reference to QAnon though his case is
closest to their narrative.

There is something deeply rotten in this apparently rampant sexual
abuse of children that lays and lies just below the surface of
society.

QAnon makes it into a joke, while ripping off plot elements from
_Bug Jack Barron_, an old science fiction novel by Norman Spinrad,
Elizabeth Báthory, the “blood countess” of Hungary, and Gilles de
Rais, who fought with Joan of Arc and then went on to a child murder
career.

I’ve spent some time over the last year looking and thinking about
these issues and it is my conclusion that the elite prep schools
have been hotbeds of abuse since forever and probably still are. 
Part of it comes out of the English boarding school tradition and
the hierarchy built into it.  It’s Tom Brown’s School Days and Percy
Byshe Shelley getting beaten up at Eton day after day translated to
today.

My conclusion is that the ruling class of USAmerican, consciously or
unconsciously, uses child sexual abuse as a rite of passage and it
chills me to the bone.

Incidentally, NY Military Academy was part of the athletic
association that included Horace Mann and Hackley.  I’ve
corresponded with a scholar of the American right whose brother was
in the same NYMA class as Trmp and the sexual abuse there was,
according to my source, also between the students with, of course,
the usual pecking order in a HS, upperclass students abusing the
younger students.  Trmp was supposedly a BMOC and, I believe, a
barracks commander.  You can just imagine what he got up to in his
high school days.

But we can no longer approach this history, this present day reality
without being confused with QAnon.  Perhaps that was one of the
purposes of that strain of propaganda anyway and it makes me
furious.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #141 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 21 08:56

    
One  unusual thing about MMMXI is its lack of fashion.  Just, a year
with no signature clothes style.

Living in Italy has sensitized me to clothing, especially many
visits to Milan, a city with a stern dress-code. The Milanese gaze
at you in despair when you fail their standards.  Ibiza is nowhere
near so stylish as Milan, because Ibiza lacks a thriving catwalk
industry with branded lifestyle-packaging, but Ibiza is intensely
fashionable because so many young, sexy people dress up to party.

At least, when there were parties, young, trendy people used to do
that.  Not now.

Dress is about semiotics and class signifiers, and there are many
small demographics on little Ibiza.  Many native Ibizans are
blue-collar support personnel for the global tourist trade, so they
dress like maintenance people, infrastructure people and hotel
staffers. Personally, when in Ibiza, I dress like them.  It's my
victory condition when the locals start asking me for directions.
They didn't when I first got here, but now they do.

In Ibiza I wear strange Ibiza gear that I'd wear nowhere else, such
as Spanish nylon cargo pants, striped sailor-shirts and wooly
berets, but nobody looks twice at me.   In Ibiza, the people look
twice at the dance-clothes. Ibiza abounds in spangled tube-tops,
miniskirts, patterned tights, disco-ball raver-girl gear.  Dance is
the engine of all Ibiza fashion.  It's a dance island where young,
libidinous people come to strut-their-stuff.

In a highly contagious plague that scene just doesn't happen.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #142 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 21 09:00

    
In Ibiza the weird absence of dance fashion is painfully obvious. 
Half of downtown is fashion shops, all the chains one would expect,
Yamamay, Intimissimi, Oysho, Zara, Desigual, Mango, Tezenis, the
youth-centric European boutiques, and quite a few local Balearic
boutiques too.  But their basic reason for existence has been
cancelled.  There's an epidemic.  There's just no good reason to
dress up and show off.  Why do it?

I wouldn't say that the Ibizans have become "drab" exactly — they're
not wearing rags, they wear reasonable clothes to walk around in and
they look much like other Spanish people, like, say, suburban
Valencians (ouch).  But they're just not *performing.* They're not
hip and with-it, because they lack any target to be with-it at. 
Normally they're all performance, because there's so many tourists
on-the-make among them.  So many glam celebrities hopping off yachts
and jets.  Ibizans are accustomed to glamour, it's like Vitamin C
for them.  They can eat all you've got with a smile.

Now there's no objective reason to have any glamour.  Nobody would
be impressed by it.  The effort to be a pretty jet-setter obtains no
reward.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #143 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 21 09:01

    

The Spanish fashion chain called Oysho is doing okay, but their
pajama business has taken over half the local store.  Ibizan women
are cooped up at home, and so they're wearing lounge pajamas.  And
their men dress even more indifferently, because why would you get
taut, sharp and on top of your game? Where is the loose, willing
woman you're supposed to court and impress?  She's in quarantine!

In your glum male despair you can't even HIRE such a woman (a common
practice on Ibiza, which abounds in globe-trotting call-girls). 
When there's no tourism, there's no sex-tourism.  So there's no
décolletage, no Mardi Gras, no tawdriness, no sleaziness, and none
of the impressively large infrastructural and commercial practices
that back up the oldest profession.  

It's like they're living in  backless hospital gowns — you can see
how much they're missing, their frail humanity, their painful
unease, is laid bare — but they've also been sedated.  They're
surviving in a cultural blackout.  They're not dying as fast as they
would have died without the quarantines, but there's next to nothing
going on, no scene to make, no concerts, films, festivals or even
museum shows.  Every day is much like the last.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #144 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 12 Jan 21 09:03

    

Ibiza has a demographic class of  traveling celebrities who choose
to show up in Ibiza — supermodels, music people, athletes, antique
movie stars and newfangled influencers.  None of them are here. 
Also, when one look at older pictures of these fashionistas, busy at
their craft, they look increasingly archaic.   They're just not
"stylish."  They're dusty.  They're not modern.

There will be some "mode" on the far side of this, but I don't think
it can look like any earlier mode.  There was nothing much wrong
with that earlier mode, it didn't die because fashion was bad or
lacking in commercial efficiency, but that won't be what fashion is,
on the far side of this great global trial.

What was sexy once is not sexy now.  Everything from the pre-Covid
world any lacks healthy sex-appeal, it has a pre-AIDS look about it.
You wouldn't WANT to be in a big sweaty rave with those pre-masked
people, for their whole value system has been invalidated,
disrupted.

Fashion will re-appear, and some new style will dominate the 2020s,
but the longer it takes to emerge from its morgue-like shadow, the
more radically different it will look.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #145 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Tue 12 Jan 21 09:06

    
On the sex abuse theories, what gets me is that it's so fantastical.
You'd think you'd link up the Democrats to the Catholic Church, to
the Boy Scouts, to Jeffrey Epstein, but no, there's some place with
a basement.  A place that doesn't have a basement in real life.  But
it seems to be a psychological basement - a fairy tale.  Not the
princess and unicorns kind of fairy tale, but the nasty original
ones that the Grimm brothers documented.  

Perhaps it's a natural outcome of the Q-Anon "game" both (jonl) and
I pointed to, to pull in the material from Jungian shadow.  You'd
think just having enemies bent on destroying your government would
be sufficient, but no.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #146 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 21 09:17

    
If you look at the world news right now, the headlines are
Covid-related. The unpredictable virus is more powerful than Trump,
more powerful than Biden, more powerful than Boris Johnson, more
powerful than Putin, more powerful than Jinping. Everybody's talking
about it, thinking about it, trying to figure out how to control it.
What else is more compelling? How do you make sense of it?

Following Bruce's fashion riff - the latest trend in fashion is with
branded high-fashion face masks. Now we have face mask trends:
<https://medium.com/@AyeeshaAbk/face-mask-trends-2020-59696836e502> 

Check out this mask from Collina Strada:
<https://collinastrada.com/collections/frontpage/products/fashion-face-mask-wit
h-bows-nepal-meadowland-rose-sylk> "MADE FROM ROSE SYLK DEADSTOCK MATERIALS FROM COLLINA STRADA COLLECTIONS. EACH MASK IS UNIQUE DUE TO LIMITED FABRIC AND INHERENT VARIATIONS ASSOCIATED WITH THE USE OF DEADSTOCK FABRICS."

Or these masks from Dolce & Gabbana:
<https://us.dolcegabbana.com/en/men/accessories/masks/neoprene-face-mask-with-b
aroque-and-polka-dot-print-multicolor-FY349TGEQ18HN2UI.html> "For its new project, Dolce&Gabbana is seeking to meet the mandatory and indisputable need to wear a protective face mask, yet in an utterly personal and unique way. Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana have created a Men’s/Women’s face mask project, in printed neoprene with 100% cotton lining, featuring our iconic prints: polka dots, leopard, majolica, carretto, the bold DG logo plus heart, the baroque logo and the latest of our prints that distinguished the Sicilian Jungles collection. This is an idea designed to help us return to our everyday lives and to put our own personal touch on our style, yet with the proper precautions, all in the spirit of Dolce&Gabbana."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #147 of 250: Edward Maw (jonl) Tue 12 Jan 21 10:40

    
Checking in from Londonistan with new years greetings, from ed and
all of us at GreenNet (<https://gn.apc.org> UK's oldest ISP and
storied contemporary of well.com)

We're bemused and giddy from a year of relentless current affairs,
our cartoon politicians enacting a daily pantomime over our
knackered political system. Brexit day arrived, just preceded by the
last minute "Deal" - our divorce from Europe, our government playing
the role of the conniving abuser, bad faith and broken promises,
stalling and brinkmanship. Nobody seems to know how we will fare but
it's possible that now the negotiations are done a more pragmatic
approach might emerge, but that seems unlikely and there are already
jokes about fish war on social media. the endless dithering and
shocking nepotism exhibited in the pandemic response bodes ill, as
they say.

Meanwhile civil society thrives, the pandemic has driven us online
and after a year we're seeing some notable events taking place, like
the influential Oxford Real Farming Conference <https://orfc.org.uk>
which has been able to open its virtual doors to an international
audience for the first time (meanwhile the toxic government is
re-introducing neonicotinoids).

Local support groups that started up at the beginning of the
pandemic are persisting and fostering community activism using
ubiquitous whats and fb which along with zoom have generally proved
to be up to the task of keeping us connected, despite being dodgy
corporates. Schools jumped straight onto google classroom, so now a
generation of UK kids are on gmail :(  like it or not.

Digital Access has been an issue, but energetic grass roots groups
like Refugee Action
<https://www.ragp.org.uk/guidance/digital-inclusion/home> and
amazing projects like Good Things Foundation launched successful
digital inclusion campaigns early on in the pandemic. Schools are
closed again now and the homeschooling/remote learning/WFH
combination is becoming the norm, even as online participation is
becoming possible for crucial public functions like courts and
tribunal service hearings. 

So tech has had to step up, and people have got used to zoom calling
to the extent that where conversations used to be about how amazing
it is to all be together online, if you could even get past
interminable rounds of 'i can see you, can you hear me' amazing
initiatives like <https://coma.org> are making the most of it. The
winter holidays were a big test of whether this new mode of being
together is tolerable, and it seems a lot of folk just popped in to
see their loved ones while a lot of others shared the joy remotely -
the next few weeks could see the capacity crunch on our health
services that we seemed to just miss on the first wave.

We look upon the antics of our anglosphere big sibling fondly, it
all seems like a big and impressive performance which we can't help
be enthralled by, to the extent that we've spent decades on
disastrous militarism in the shadow of the US. While there are
parallels in the deep prejudices that sometimes animate our politics
and the effects from our atrocious middle eastern wars -
re-militarisation, the cult of veterans and a blowback played out by
violent right wingers on the streets.

It feels like our vibrational frequencies both online and offline
are increasingly febrile, we're flocking and murmurating, forming
mobs and cancelling witches wherever we find them - if we can just
direct all that energy at the fat politicians who are revelling in
impunity! Maybe the osint movement is showing us the way, the wise
comment above about collusion and tipping points cuts both ways!

Anyhow, thanks for another year of thoughtful provocations and big
perspectives, this place is always a new years treat, if you're ever
passing <https://dissensus.com> or GreenNet please feel free. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #148 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 12 Jan 21 16:21

    
That's a reposted email?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #149 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 12 Jan 21 17:13

    
The deplatforming meme continues to spread. Apparently AirBnb hosts
are getting in on it [1].

I just spent some time arguing on another system (tildes.net) that
private coordination is unnecessary when public coordination does
everything you need. But the urge to conspiracy-theorize seems
irresistible? Many of us shrug it off like a cold,
compartmentalizing off our speculations, but I've seen Facebook
friends come down with a bad case of it. A high school classmate
dropped off the net last year. I hope he's okay.

I read a blog post [2] suggesting that conspiracy theories are
endemic everywhere and, if anything, we're less susceptible than
most. Apparently they are common in Mexico and China?

With respect to memes, we are a plague-ridden world and social
networks are like cities or the airlines. Most public health
measures are barely invented. There is no CDC for conspiracy
theories. A few pump handles have been removed. Maybe that will
help? Departing for the countryside seems like a good idea, but then
you'll miss the fun stuff.

[1]
https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/2021/01/12/airbnb-inauguration-dc-ren
tal/
[2]
https://www.econlib.org/theres-nothing-weird-about-conspiracy-theories/
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #150 of 250: ixak (ixak23) Tue 12 Jan 21 19:24

    
One of the really challenging things about this forum at this moment
is the "State of the World" that we're talking about is going to
substantially change a week after this conversation ends.

Of course it's a mistake to center this conversation on the US, but
the current occupant has taken such a singular approach to
international affairs that many of the major players (and minor
players) have been going for the gusto while the going was good.
Players like the UAE, Bahrain, Morocco, Sudan and Israel cut their
deals now, because they knew that deals that sweet were unlikely to
come around again. China, Russia, and Turkey have been making their
moves across Africa and Asia with breakneck speed, for similar
reasons - under the normal circumstances the default neoliberal
stance of the the two US political parties wouldn't book the types
of opportunism they've gotten away with over the last few years.

Certainly there are plenty of countries who have (covid aside)
simply gone about their business as though this administration was
like any other - e.g. much of South America and Southern Africa. But
the dynamics in beleaguered areas that are weak and are within
contested spheres of global power competition are about to see
likely escalation in those competitions. From my position as an
occasional contractor for some of the US foreign policy shops, the
scuttlebutt seems to indicate that the Biden team will be taking a
rather ambitious approach to foreign policy  - despite featuring
more than a few faces from the notoriously cautious Obama
administration - and will be less inclined to be quite as
circumspect in their efforts.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #151 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Wed 13 Jan 21 03:41

    
It's a cliche to describe anything about this administration as
reality TV, or the meeting point of tragedy and farce, and yet,
there's a strong panem et circenses whiff to the unhealthily
compelling aftermath of the insurrection. Like so much that has
happened over the past four years, it is both serious - deadly, in
fact - and a distraction that allows the kleptocracy and destruction
to continue a little longer. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #152 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 05:50

    
Via email from George Mokray:

In the summer of 1671, elite dinner table conversation in England
was about the rumor that children were being abducted to provide
fresh blood to cure French King Louis XIV of leprosy.  (Source: 
Lady Bette and the Murder of Mr Thynn: A Scandalous Story of
Marriage and Betrayal in Restoration England by Nigel Pickford)

And then there's Elizabeth Bathory of Hungary, the "Blood Countess,"
also the title of the book Andrei Codrescu wrote about her, who
actually bathed in virgin's blood to preserve her beauty, and Gilles
de Rais, the comrade in arms of Joan of Arc who killed children for
"Satanic rites" (according to his accusers) and was probably the
model for Bluebeard. Norman Mailer wrote a never produced screenplay
called "Trial of the Warlock" about him.

Not to mention the 1969 science fiction novel Bug Jack Barron by
Norman Spinrad whose plot involves radiating children to produce a
medicine that gives the wealthy longevity and youth (does Ray
Kurzweil know about that?). If I were Spinrad, I'd sue QAnon for
plagiarism.

We are living through a period of mad and maddening popular
delusions. Carl Jung would be having a field day explaining this
eruption of the collective unconscious but don't you get caught up
in it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #153 of 250: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 06:00

    
Via email from fruitbatpangolin:

You are being distracted.

If I had my extra cynical tinfoil hat on, the one made of a
perfectly normal hat, I might say that the current political cycle
has a very Foundation and Empire/New Coke vibe going on. 

A friend commented when Trump was elected, that personally, he was
finally convinced that the Illuminati or their equivalent did not
exist, or at least were not in charge of anything much if they did. 

His logic was that no plan from a extant position of supreme
overarching political power would end up requiring a Donald, and
also that people operating from such a position would tend to
instinctively reject a Donald as a potential representative in any
major plans. Partly on grounds of taste, and partly on grounds of
extreme unreliability. 

The Donald, after all, is essentially Douglas Adams’ President
Beeblebrox, a pinpoint satire of US political power now made flesh
(yet again), but in an incarnation more unhinged than the fiction
and, in marked contrast to Zaphod, so unhip that it is a wonder his
bum doesn’t fall off. And also in contrast with Zaphod, no self
administered lobotomy as an excuse for saying stupid shit, at least
that we currently know of.

Because of this, his current political existence does kinda make the
most sense as a Russian political counterplay to the US enabling of
Boris Yeltsin stumbling blind drunk into power, giving Gorby a
chance he probably welcomed, that of retiring gracefully into the
1990s London free party scene. 

So therefore boringly old school realpolitik as per usual, a
skirmish between warring geopolitical blocks, planned and backed by
an experienced spook turned dictator, who has more than a bit of a
justifiable grudge and is busily playing a game of twit for twat.

Makes some vague sense of sorts.

But this got me thinking about whether there are any counterpoints
of moderately sane plans that actively require a Donald and are not
from the internal perspective of competing national power blocks.
And I kept coming back to Asimov’s Hari Seldon and the idea of
crashing a civiliszation in order to ‘save’ it. 

This isn’t purely a hypothetical strategy, given something in a
similar vein is one of the reasons suggested for the US being
helpful to Yeltsin; attempting shock economic strategies used
already on many other countries since the war, but this time on the
USSR. 

Trouble with that, as a plan, was that most of the folk round there
are not of exactly the shockable sort. Whereas other populations
might panic and try and reassemble their collapsing country, many
Russians seemed to shrug it off with the utter confidence that no
matter what happens today, the vast majority of their existential
state is still going to be around to try and kill them again
tomorrow.

Now consider that one of the larger geopolitical pendulums, the one
from introversion to extroversion, may be as much biological as it
is  political. If we observe that behavior elsewhere in nature, we
may well conclude that the studied species has an evolutionary
adaptation to get both a wide selection of the gene pool, and fast
genetic drifts. And also that we can observe that behavior across a
wide range of other social species. 

Neither behavior is the ‘correct answer’ in such an adaptation, as
it is the dynamics of the interplay between them that confers the
evolutionary advantage.

However, if such a thing were the case, you could know ahead of time
and approximately when, and in which populations, the next nazi
variant was likely going to go and accidentally do a nazi. But you
might also know that stopping these particular tides of history is
actually a right Cnut of a problem. 

One of the clear options available in such a situation, if trying to
minimize conflict, is to promote the most foolish leaders in the
movement so that they don’t have the logistical chops to organize a
genocide, turn the whole thing into a ludicrous clown show, and
inoculate a generation against the entire political idea, on grounds
of the whole thing looking really fucking stupid.

Enter Donald Trump, dressed in a cartoon frog suit, stage right.

Not saying that this is really the case, or saying that the first
reading is either. Personally I suspect that a better explanation
might just be that people are all just delusional crazy bastards, as
a feature.

I do, however, stand by my first sentence. Am a little bit off to
the side of it, to be precise, waving a can of special brew in one
hand and a placard in the other, while shouting obscenities at
passing ducks.

You are being distracted.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #154 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 06:53

    
Trump's election was probably an anomaly, an accident, more a
repudiation of Hillary Clinton and a celebration of our electoral
college, which disfavors urban centers, ensuring that they can't
override the will of rural America. This may be crazy and
undemocratic on the face of it, but it's what we've got, and it
means that Republicans have been able to place presidents for years
without winning the popular vote. This is why they wage emotional
campaigns in rural America, pretending to be a friend to those who
are increasingly overlooked as so many smart and capable Americans
swarm to urban centers and urban jobs. (Our remote work experiment
during the pandemic, if it sticks, might change the equation.)

Nobody thought a Trump could be elected president before it
happened. I say "a Trump," because it wasn't so much the guy who was
elected, but what he represented. A charismatic populist demagogue
who effectively hid his self-obsession and pretended to be a friend
- and a savior - to his followers. And a lightning rod for their
darkest thoughts. He made it okay to flaunt norms, ignore laws,
dismantle institutions. He's destructive, but the destruction is not
clear yet to his supporters. A charismatic bull in the China shop,
convincing all the shoppers that he's just there to browse, inviting
them to ignore the shattered plates, cups, gravy boats... 

Discussions of Trump aren't US-centric. You see weak strongmen
throughout the world, and they're pretty much like him, in fact he
studies and follows their moves. Having one of their own in the
highest position of power in the USA, as the "leader of the free
world," further enables and empowers them. Some have feared that a
Trump dictatorship would be the death of democratic movements that
have always been fragile. As Adam Gopnik writes in the New Yorker,
"The temptation of anti-democratic cult politics is forever with us,
and so is the work of fending it off."
<https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/01/04/what-we-get-wrong-about-americas
-crisis-of-democracy> I.e. human nature can dismiss democracy readily and easily. 

Democracy was going to be an evolution to something better, but it
works against darker elements of the psyche that have a real
strength and a will to dominate.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #155 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 21 07:44

    
The fashionistas in Ibiza swiftly tried to make masks sexy, once
they realized that everybody would have to buy a mask and constantly
wear many of them, but that effort didn't pan out.  Nobody wears
cute fashionable masks.

The masks are too fearsome to be cute, because the Rona is a
respiratory disease and the masks are symbolic of pain and death
from breath itself.  So one can window-shop past the somnolent
clothing stores and all the masks in jolly punk/hippie/disco
patterns are at half-price now.

There will be *some* sexy masks, in the way that there are also some
sexy condoms.  One might think that condoms would be relentlessly
sexy since they're directly functional objects in sexual activities,
but no, they're not sexy, they're medical.  Condoms aren't fun and
flirtatious, they're all about the aspects of sex that are risky and
troublesome and possibly infectious, so they just can't get
glamorous.  They're a requirement, they're not an adornment.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #156 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 21 07:45

    

Ibiza is under lockdown again after a feeble yet infectious holiday
mini-season.  The cultural sedation will continue.

There's been some discreet discussion among the Ibizan
Great-and-Good about somehow vaccinating all the Ibizan locals and
then throwing the disco doors back open.  Just, you know, let 'em
fly in and infect each other, if they want to!  There's a certain
unspoken tradition to this cynic's approach, since Ibizan discos
used to be famous for their STD infection rates.   After all, if
footloose Swedes, Germans, Irish, Russians and Italians are all
swapping spirochetes in there, what, realistically, are you gonna do
about that?  The Bacchanalian licentiousness is the point of the
enterprise!

It's quite a dreadful image though — gigantic multimedia discos with
maximum sight'n'sound glare as loci of global fatal infection.  It's
almost a medieval Dance Macabre, or a shuddersome Breughel painting
after a handful of party-pills.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #157 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 21 07:45

    

I used to show up in Ibiza during the off-season when there was
nothing much going on, and I would get a lot of creative work  done
here.  The island was pretty and pleasant, and interestingly quirky,
but also small and a little dull, and it was isolating (being an
island).  So I could put my thoughts in order, and distill and
express things that I had experienced in busier places.  And that
was good for me; I felt energized.

Now Ibiza's duller than anyone in living memory has probably ever
seen Ibiza, and yet I lack the tumult from elsewhere that used to
inspire me.  So I find that I can re-write things, and tinker a bit,
but it's hard for me to break any new ground.  It's a contemplative,
hermetic life, it's not propulsive and visionary.

I didn't realize that I needed some off-kilter social energy to get
me off dead-center, but it seems to be true.  Nobody tugs my sleeves
here, and I've got plenty of free time outside of cooking, light
home repair and some minding of the Tiny Spaniard.  So I ought to be
on an endless writerly sabbatical where I really spin out the prose,
but, well, no, I'm not doing that.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #158 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 13 Jan 21 07:47

    

Mostly I stare, point and click at the tumult of the news, but since
it's all filtered through a glass screen and I don't venture out
physically to mix it up with the tenor of the times, it doesn't
inspire me.  I pay a lot of attention to the deeds of the world, and
I annotate it, and I analyze it, but I don't much feel like writing
about it, or, really, writing about much of anything.  It's like
trying to be a novelist among the Eloi in the H G Wells "Time
Machine," that pretty yet listless tribe who lack motivation, yet
also find their ranks thinned by midnight visits from the cannibal
Morlocks.

I don't want to scold myself overly for this quietude of quarantine;
many creatives in many societies and situations clearly feel much
the same way now.  It's even an interesting proof that the audience
directly inspires the performer, that all creative works are
socially generated, like language itself is.  Stories arise from the
popular need to hear stories; a book merely happen to be voiced by
some individual with his name on the spine of the book.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #159 of 250: Sigmundur Halldórsson (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 07:52

    
Via email from Sigmundur Halldórsson:

One of the more interesting books I read last year was Deep Fakes
and the Infocalypse: What You Urgently Need To Know by Nina Schick

<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/54828853-deep-fakes-and-the-infocalypse>

Which raised the fact that we're now seriously into the era of deep
fake videos. Which caused quite a stir when Channel 4 in the UK
created a fake Queens speech.

<https://youtu.be/IvY-Abd2FfM>

The issue that Nina raises is not so much that we'll be submerged in
all kinds of fake videos, but that we are now entering an era of
where we are completely unable to determine what's real. "Deepfakes
could give everyone the power to fake anything, and if everything
can be faked then everyone has plausible deniability.”
Disinformation is certainly not a US specific problem and if we are
moving towards a splintered ethnonational network, are we going to
also about to enter a period of ethnonational definitions of
"reality and facts"? The apparent willingness of many to move beyond
fact-based discussion has proven to be a disaster during the plague.
So while rule by the techno elite might sound quite dystopian, it's
also a question if the alternative is any less dystopian? Living
within the East Roman Byzantine empire after the fall of Rome was
probably better than being stranded in some less well-regulated
corners of the fallen empire. So which former empire do we want to
take up residency in?   
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #160 of 250: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 13 Jan 21 11:38

    
Ths was posted elsewhere on The Well. It's a nice, concise argument
for the stance that Peter Coyote calls Radical Optimism. Also fairly
well expressed by Russell Brand at times. In effect, "Look around at
how crazy the world is. There's your proof that ANYTHING can
happen."

<https://caitlinjohnstone.substack.com/p/just-because-the-system-is-stacked>

One page. Worth the 2 minutes,imho.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #161 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 14:54

    
<doctorow> has said that blogging is how he makes sense of the
world.

Here's how he blogs:
<https://pluralistic.net/2021/01/13/two-decades/#hfbd>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #162 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 13 Jan 21 15:40

    
Caity Johnstone says it's not really that bad. I feel so much better
for having read that!
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #163 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 13 Jan 21 19:17

    
<karish> Are you referring to this?
<https://caitlinjohnstone.com/2021/01/13/just-because-the-system-is-stacked-aga
inst-you-doesnt-mean-the-universe-is/>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #164 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 13 Jan 21 21:41

    
Even if mask fashion isn't big, it seems a few people are having fun
with it, online anyway?

https://thebolditalic.com/tagged/mask-envy
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #165 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 21 07:50

    
I got a snail mail letter from the Internal Revenue Service. They're
concerned that I may be a victim of identity theft, so they're
advising me to assemble various documents from my previous tax
returns, and call them up voice-mail during office hours, and
attempt to verbally prove to them that I'm me.

You'd think that they could just ask Facebook, or Amazon, or Google,
or Amazon, or Microsoft, who must have many, many terabytes all
about me and my existent me-ness.  But no.  On the contrary. It may
indeed be that some criminal algorithm has purloined my identity and
is filing fake tax returns with the IRS and wants the IRS to pay
them.

So I reckon I'll have to attempt to do something about it.  I have
few illusions that this will be quick or easy.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #166 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 21 07:57

    
I hope and plan to return to my native soil next month, to meet with
my family, but that trip will be difficult if it's possible at all,
and to greet my relations during an epidemic will be dangerous.

Also, to walk into an IRS federal office with some of my extensive,
authentic ID, so as to prove that I'm me to my government, is gonna
be ten times MORE dangerous.

However, here in languid, idyllic Ibiza, Covid-19 just broke out in
my own apartment building. It could have been me bringing it to the
neighbors -- by some statistical fluke, it isn't -- but the wolf's
at the door.

Interesting times.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #167 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 14 Jan 21 08:00

    
Claire Boucher says she has Covid-19 now.  She's better-known as
"Grimes," the current mistress of the richest man in the world. 
Even before her extensive dalliance with Elon Musk, I've been quite
the Grimes fan.  I don't just listen to Claire's music, I cheerfully
pay for it.

Whatever happens to musicians will happen to everybody.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #168 of 250: Lena via lendie (lendie) Thu 14 Jan 21 09:28

    
I doubt the IRS is taking walk-ins these days.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #169 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 21 09:36

    
This would indeed be an "interesting" time for you to visit the home
front. We might be living in a different world a month from now.
There's trouble brewing, it's hard to know exactly what to expect.
I'm hearing that the raid on the US Capitol had the effect of
rallying the troops, now driven underground as their public social
media presences have been disconnected. The downside of
disconnection is that we can't see as clearly what they're up to -
but that clear visibility didn't prevent the storming of the
Capitol, so perhaps that's not a loss.

Word is that there's more to come, and the protests over the next
week will be armed, and will in all state capitols as well as DC. 

This is trouble that's been brewing, really, since the end of World
War II. Consider this re. the work of historian Bradley Hart, who's
studied Nazism in the USA: "...the threat of Nazism in the United
States before World War II was greater than we generally remember
today, and that those forces offer valuable lessons decades later —
and not just because part of that story is the history of the
'America First' idea, born of pre-WWII isolationism and later reborn
as a slogan for now-President Donald Trump." 

"Hart, who came to the topic via research on the eugenics movement
and the history of Nazi sympathy in Britain, says he realized early
on that there was a lot more to the American side of that story than
most textbooks acknowledged. Some of the big names might get
mentioned briefly — the radio priest Father Charles Coughlin, or the
highly public German American Bund organization — but in general, he
says, the American narrative of the years leading up to World War II
has elided the role of those who supported the wrong side."

<https://time.com/5414055/american-nazi-sympathy-book/>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #170 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 21 09:47

    <scribbled by jonl Thu 14 Jan 21 13:01>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #171 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 14 Jan 21 13:19

    <scribbled by bslesins Thu 14 Jan 21 16:54>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #172 of 250: Scott Henry (jonl) Thu 14 Jan 21 13:50

    
Via email from Scott Henry:

I got one of those IRS snail-mail letters a couple of months ago. It
turned out to be much easier and quicker than I had anticipated. I
spent less than an hour on the phone, and very little was queue
time. Mine was a bit complicated,so I would expect most people
would spend less than 1/2 hour.

They told me that the IRS is only taking walk-ins if it can't be
resolved over the phone.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #173 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 14 Jan 21 16:55

    
(Scribbled my post since it was in response to Jon's, which was
meant for a different topic.)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #174 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 14 Jan 21 22:56

    
Having just caught up on many days of this conversation, I'm
grateful for the thoughts, perceptions, directions it's taken... 
and for the words of the contributors from outside the Well.

One thing that's scarcely found mention are the sources of
resilience, in individual human psyches and cultures.
Beauty-perception and beauty's making, in small and large ways.
Love, in all its forms and shapes and versions. A sense of
participating in something larger than one's own small fate. Art.
Stories. Jokes. The deep pleasure of trying to figure things out on
one's own and with others, of trying to understand with more
complexity, concision, and even sometimes style. For some us growing
things, for others cooking, or sewing-- any activity that doesn't
take well to ignoring the actualities. The recognition of being in
it together with everyone and everything else. 

What am I leaving out? 

I do take it as a manifestation of sanity-robustness that the U.S.
election and then the Georgia one went as they did. It could have
been otherwise. Over the past four years, one source of resilience
for me has been taking some political action, however useless it may
have felt, every day. Not just my own home-action of writing and
public speaking, but the action of doing some of the basic grunt
work. Indivisible-recommended pestering. Voter-informing handwritten
postcard campaigns. Anything-- donating, signing on to a petition --
but: daily. And before the pandemic, when I would say I was doing
this at public events, I could see--one or two people out of a few
hundred might take up the practice. Or do something at least, not
nothing.

For me, that sense of simple solidarity in intention and action has
been a source of resilience. 

Solidarity can go badly awry. Solidarity-hunger is a neutral
longing. When not coupled with some active desire for eyes open to
reality-consequence and some active desire for the well-being of all
beings, it can lead to QAnon and to half-sacking the Rotunda.
Wanting to belong is not enough, on its own.

I don't find resilience in simple tribalism, but I may be an outlier
there.

I have found some restoration of resilience in setting aside the
self for swaths of time. But that also is a neutral technology,
whose effect and meaning vary by context. As was posted above,
distraction is not a good answer to the cries of the world.
(Buddhist reference there: Avalokiteshvara, bodhisattva of
compassion-- the name translates as "the one who hears the cries of
the world and comes.")

It's my sense that the people in this conversation--everyone here,
really--are people engaged in that wish, one way or other. To see
reality accurately and to attempt to leave the world a bit better
for all, present and future, by our own passage through it.

When we look at the State of the World, that isn't what we see. But
as with mycelial networks, above-ground invisibility doesn't mean
non-presence. Something is keeping the story going, so far, keeping
us fed, sheltered, raising children, taking care of one another and
our elders as best we can, able to wake up in the morning and
(mostly) not fall into complete despair. And so far the oceans not
emptied entirely, the forests not stripped entirely, the cities not
burned entirely, pain not reduced to mutual slaughter entirely.

We've spoken little this year about biosphere and climate. The
pandemic and the politics have been this year's protagonists. But
here in the Bay Area, on Sept 9th, when the fire smoke kept the day
dark red and headlamps and streetlights and house lights needed at
eight a.m., nine a.m., noon,  two p.m., four p.m., right back into
nightfall, it felt to me that some scrim of normality had been
pulled back and I was seeing the damage as it truly always is now. 
And I saw somewhere, in the past couple days, that fires are
starting in Australia now again.

The pandemic of course helped the planet a bit, lowering emissions.
Birds in San Francisco went back to singing the old-ways songs, not
heard for decades, when they didn't need to compete with traffic. It
showed, to say the obvious, that if we humans decide we need to
stop, we greatly can. Not completely, but greatly. 

That's really something. All it takes is a this-moment fear for your
life and the lives of those you love, and look: some large
proportion of us change what we think and do, in ways that are
difficult.

Two months from now, a lot of things are going to be clearer--about
the vaccines and how quickly they will reach how many and where.
About U.S. political landscape and social contract-- which could be
better by then, but could also be far worse than it is now.

The state of the world is granular, particular, various, revealing
itself a bit differently to each of our eyes and lives, even when
we've pretty much all gone through one shared calamity at
precipitous, dizzying speed (that's somehow felt also a slowing).

I've been thinking of Victor Frankl and Primo Levi, of the
preservation of a sense of meaning as aid to survival in the most
concrete ways, and also, thought frequently over these many months,
of a haiku by Issa:

we walk
on the roof of hell,
gathering blossoms.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #175 of 250: Ari Davidow (ari) Fri 15 Jan 21 05:34

    
Yes. Thank you, Jane.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #176 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 21 05:39

    
Thank you, Jane, for that insightful and eloquent contribution to
the conversation.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #177 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 21 05:54

    
To what Jane has written, I add this quote from author Barry Lopez,
who died on Christmas Day:

"A dangerous bit of American folklore is that our social,
environmental, and political problems, which grow more ominous by
the day, call for the healing touch of a genius. They do, but if
we're intent on waiting for some such remarkable individual to show
up we can count on disappointment. The solution to what threatens
us, however, is already here, in another form. It's in our diverse
communities. Most often we recognize the quality of genius in an
individual man or woman; but the source of that genius lies with the
complicated network of carefully tended relationships that sets a
vibrant human community apart from a solely political community."

<http://www.barrylopez.com/blog>

Searching for a "complicated network of carefully tended
relationships" led me away from myself. I was drawn to the sense of
community associated with the Whole Earth catalog and its related
publications and projects. One of those projects was the WELL, and
that's how I came to be a member here three decades ago. I have
spent the years since then pretending to have expertise about
"virtual community" while keenly aware internally that my
understanding was more an intellectual exercise - yes, I knew
something about community, but I failed over and over as a
community-builder. I was too selfish.

That kind of selfishness is, I think, the problem of the world. If
we survive, we survive together. If we have a life and a future
together, we have to find our way around inherent selfishness, we
have to find true and diverse community with others. I hope to be
more helpful in that regard. I'm still too selfish.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #178 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 21 07:49

    
The Italian government is about to collapse in the middle of an
epidemic. The querulous public response is "how can you do this in
the midst of an epidemic?" and the answer is that they do that all
the time.

It's not that they're indifferent to the epidemic, or that they
don't want to vigorously fight it, it's just the mounting body count
can't indefinitely repress their national characteristics.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #179 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 15 Jan 21 08:03

    
I read that Cory Doctorow post that jonl recommended earlier, and I
admire the professionalism and the work ethic there, but man, I am
way, way too much the laid-back Austin slacker to ever want to be
that busy.

https://pluralistic.net/2021/01/13/two-decades/#hfbd

My idea of successful careerism is waking up whenever I feel like
it.  Also, whenever it looks like I might be establishing some
"productive routine," I tend to promptly destroy it by climbing on a
plane and going somewhere else.

Cory's discipline is awe-inspiring, but really, if you wanna write
sci-fi novels, feel free to read all that and then be a lot more
listless.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #180 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 15 Jan 21 09:28

    <scribbled by jh Fri 15 Jan 21 09:31>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #181 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 15 Jan 21 09:34

    
(scribbled above & reposted to make a couple tiny edits, sorry)

Thanks for that Barry Lopez quote, Jon. He was one of the great
souls and will be sorely missed. He kept doing the work of trying to
remind us new ones of old truths right up to the end, and he did it
in new words and with new insights for a new era of understanding.
Including the sciences, including the relative ease now with which
someone with the capacity and curiosity could find himself looking
eye to eye at life forms under the Antarctic ice shelf. 

That's a sign of the larger state of the world too. Somewhere above
it was mentioned that one of the hallmarks of the pandemic has been
the reduction of direct witness. But one of the hallmarks of the
only slightly longer time line state of the world has been its
immense increase. The increase of direct witness has gone from a
relative few to the relatively near in the Ancient World to, now, a
world where (if you have the worklife that leads to it, or just the
privilege of time and funds), a person can go to rainforest in Costa
Rica, a city in China, a coal mine turned into an arts center 300
meters below ground in Silesia, and the Svalbard seed bank.

And, at remove, see a geomorphologist friend over Zoom do a screen
share and show me the photos the Mars rover has been taking, and
tell me how it's being driven now by someone from their living room.

The new permeability leads some to raise spectres of fear. For
others, it makes clear the nature of the blue marble and its
drifting clouds of mutually supporting life forms.

Bringing in Barry's quote also reminds me of something I thought
reading Brian's post above about reposting pointers as a way of
promulgating thoughtfulness. Yes, someone has to write those
original posts we all share; but also, Walter Benjamin wrote of the
essay (a form attempting to think new syntheses with a responsive
intelligence) as a _conversation_ between people over time and
space, and once said that perhaps the ideal essay would consist
entirely of quotations. 

Literacy (which lets us quote with accuracy) gave us all a way to
begin to think together, to see farther by standing on the shoulders
of others...   (The Well has given me that now, too, like Jon, for
thirty years.)

Broad literacy (defined broadly) is roughly 2,000 years old; defined
narrowly, much much less. But here we are, living in a world where
some huge percentage of us can pick up a pocketable device and read
almost anything anyone has ever said, and throw a few words into the
general soup pot. A world where the idea of Wikipedia is now 20
years old, and tweeting (which became a main form of horrifying
governance these past years) is 16. Where both conspiracy thinking
and Greta Thunberg's skipping school on Friday can go -- in the old
metaphorical sense of it -- viral.

Is that resilience or is it a huge increase of fragility? Depends on
the soil the seed lands on. Barry's quote's point of diversity seems
apt here. Homogeneity is brittle, in agriculture, in minds, in
cultures.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #182 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 21 14:33

    
Via email from George Mokray:

These three quotes from poets (yes Buckminster Fuller was a poet)
have guided me for a few decades now:

We remain alert so as not to get run down, but it turns out you only
have to hop a few feet to one side and the whole huge machinery
rolls by, not seeing you at all.
Lew Welch

Quite clearly, our task is predominantly metaphysical, for it is how
to get all of humanity to educate itself swiftly enough to generate
spontaneous behaviors that will avoid extinction. 
R. Buckminster Fuller

the war that matters is the war against the imagination
all other wars are subsumed in it.
Diane di Prima

May they give you guidance and solace too.

For over a decade I produced a free weekly listserv and webpage
(http://hubevents.blogspot.com) on Energy (and Other) Events around
Cambridge, MA.  It covered what happened in the community and the
public events at the local colleges and universities.  In all that
time, only EDF among the local enviro groups bothered to subscribe. 
No “activist” could see that a) some of the most important people in
the world came to Boston to talk to students and you could ask them
pointed questions in an auditorium or even in small groups and b)
some of the most knowledgeable scientists in the world came to
Boston and you could learn the most recent science from them for
free adn c) a small group of people sharing notes could gain a PhD
in energy or climate within a year and bust the academic silos to
produce new connections and new discoveries (I once did my best to
connect a physicist from the Center for Inverse Design working on
systematizing new materials with a computational sustainability
expert who was doing computational exploration for new materials).

I stopped doing my free listings in September because I was tired of
listening to many of the same people I’d heard before say the same
things I’d heard before without a single action item at the end.  I
had realized I could expand my listings service globally because
everything is now online on Zoom and started collecting resources
for that but I wasn’t going to do it as a one-man-band.  All my
attempts to interest others like Extinction Rebellion or 350.org or
Mothers Out Front were met with dead silence.  So I’ve stopped that
too.

I’d still be happy to work with a group to do a local listings (and
I can show you how to do that for any locality which has a college
or two) or a global listings and have been looking to connect with
someone who could help automate the process with scrapers that can
dump text into a programmed format but, so far, again, dead silence.

This was my version of hopping to one side, generating spontaneous
behaviors to avoid extinction, and prosecute the war against the
imagination.

PS:  I can also show people how trivial it is to provide emergency
or entry level electricity (light, communications, small battery
charging) for everyone for, probably, from about $20 to less than
$100 (but the prices on the small scale devices I like have begun to
increase over the last year).  I still wonder why I am the only
person I see on the streets of Cambridge or in the Infinite Corridor
at the ‘Tute (when I could walk it) with a home-brew solar backpack,
something I’ve had for about 17 years now.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #183 of 250: Michael Bravo (jonl) Fri 15 Jan 21 14:35

    
Via email from Michael Bravo:

On Bruce's <inkwell.vue.510.178>, it's not just Italians. 

The Dutch government has just thrown in the towel. 

Estonian government collapsed yesterday. 

Israel hasn't been able to pass a budget for at least a couple years
now (I lost count), mostly because the government is more like a
murmurating Mandelbrot set and the country is heading into the
fourth elections in two years.

I think there could be more examples (didn't Belgium go a long time
without a government recently?) if we actually look for it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #184 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 15 Jan 21 16:06

    
George, three terrific quotes, thank you. And I meant to note
earlier how glad I was to see your earlier Lew Welch allusion here.
Diane di Prima, you probably know, died recently.

I suppose you saw who was reading your listserve... but I'll just
say, I've taken one of those from U.C. Berkeley biopsychology for
many years, and it never occurred to me to communicate anything
back. (It wasn't a discussion format; it too fell silent during the
Covid era; but I simply signed up once I heard about it and read it
with gratitude.   Now I wish I'd sent a note from time to time,
"Layperson here, reading with real interest, thank you for your
efforts!"

But I can say it to this group: layperson here, reading with real
interest, thank you for your efforts.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #185 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 21 00:59

    
*I think it could also be argued that the USA has been without a
functional government recently.

*On the subject of deglobalized  belt-and-road knots, here's a
worried Irish article about Brexit "teething problems." 
Tangentially it reveals that the previous obscure Irish port of
Rosslare is booming, because ships can reach it directly from
France.

*If you happen to own real estate in Rosslare that's probably great
news, but if you're Irish and you want to eat something other than
your own potatoes, MMXXI is gonna be a tad problematic.

https://www.rte.ie/news/2021/0115/1190108-brexit-analysis-and-comment/
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #186 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 21 01:02

    

This has not been a good four years for computer science (or for any
science at all), but I still pay ardent attention to neural nets and
deep learners because they do such interesting, peculiar, niche-y
stuff.  

They tick off a lot of the old-school Artificial Intelligence boxes,
such as the ability to play great chess and to chatter to beat Alan
Turing, and yet they're by no means "intelligent."  That's not their
lack in any way, because they're an authentic technological advance.
It's our human fault for trying to apply foggy concepts of
"intelligence" to everything that's computational.  It's like we're
still trying to stuff the Amazon Cloud inside our own skulls.

I'm waiting for this neural-net tech to find some deeply
consequential killer apps, and my best guess so far would be
protein-folding and computational chemistry.  Those are some old,
important fields that are strongly resistant to other kinds of
analysis, and it seems like an arena where deep-learners, with their
weirdly sharp yet oddly simple-minded approach, might reveal
something useful, profitable, even world-changing.

I like that the recent post-2012 breed of AI is not all noospheric,
and cyberspace handwavey, and AI deus-ex-machina; there's something
about its huge power combined with bizarre limitations that suits
the tenor of the times.  There's a lot of interesting design grain
to the material there.  I even enjoy the internal debates among the
neural-net community.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #187 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 21 01:05

    

Even blockbuster AIs aren't all that "intelligent," but it's easy to
forget how smart good programmers are.  It used to be that if you
knew how to use a computer at all, everyone assumed you were an
utter brainiac, but now it's your uncle's job, or your cousin the
brogrammer.  But I got a recent good reminder when I made a joke on
Twitter.

It's about the issue of "who the hell really knows what's going on
in some science," which is  a basic problem for any popular science
writer.  Like: of course you do want to understand the science, and
give lay readers a lofty overview of the field without losing them
in the endless tall weeds, but the devil's always in the details. 
Even the executive summary turns out to be mere money-guy bullshit
most of the time.   It's truly hard to verbalize knowledge. 
Whenever you move it from one demographic paradigm to another, every
translation is treason.  

Journalists don't understand scientists and scientists know that,
but scientists don't understand other scientists.  Every scientific
discipline is delimited by the subjects that the practitioners don't
want to learn about or talk about.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #188 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 21 01:06

    

So you often see people in the AI industry kinda nervously
name-checking each other, like, okay, who can get it done and who's
the charlatan here?  They set authenticity tests for one another.  
Such as "Bindu Reddy" on Twitter.

Bindu Reddy  @bindureddy  Jan 13, 2021
An easy way to check if you know the basics of deep learning

See if you can explain these neural net concepts to a layperson

-- Stochastic Gradient Descent
-- Regularization
-- Loss functions
-- Neural Net Optimizers 
-- LSTMs
-- Variational Auto-encoders
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #189 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 16 Jan 21 01:08

    

*So, instead of "explaining these neural net concepts" -- I'm pretty
sure I could do that, but it would take me a couple of weeks -- of
course I have to intervene with some off-the-wall sci-fi wisecrack,
for such is my role in life:

Bruce Sterling @bruces Jan 13, 2021

*Special Oulipo version: do that entirely in words of one syllable
and without using the letter "e"


*Yet then, in response to this deliberately silly, arch, arcane,
literary challenge of mine,  this ex-Googler and NASA character
promptly appears:

Brad Neuberg "Machine Learning Engineer at Planet. Research
Affiliation at SETI & NASA FDL.  Previously @ Dropbox and Google"

And he just does it; he just thinks that through briefly and he
pulls it off right away.

Brad Neuberg @bradneuberg Jan 13, 2021
Replying to @bruces

My try:
— Stochastic Gradient Descent: drunks fall down hills
-- Regularization: 10 bucks a word!
-- Loss functions: costs how much?
-- Neural Net Optimizers: find good
-- LSTMs: thoughts go in bank for next thoughts
-- Variational Auto-encoders: what go in go out

*That's so fantastic.  Especially his use of "10" instead of the
forbidden word "ten."

Okay, fine, I know that the general population isn't gonna be
enlightened by this can-you-top-this verbal prank, but the
cleverness of the human mind is so impressive sometimes.  It gives
one hope for futurity, really: like, how many of our apparently
wicked problems will just yield some day, like a solved riddle?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #190 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 21 06:22

    
"how many of our apparently wicked problems will just yield some
day, like a solved riddle?"

Makes me think of the argument that we'll innovate our way out of
our climate change problem. That's a black box right now, but maybe
it'll happen. But how can we count on it? We're losing the race.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #191 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 16 Jan 21 09:15

    
When you ask "who the hell really knows what's going on" about what
an algorithm generated by machine leaning does, the answer is likely
to be "nobody at all", including the scientists who asked for the
algorithm and the mathematicians or computer scientists who
programmed the machine learning runs that generated it.

This is acceptable when the goal is to solve a problem like protein
folding where it's possible to use other means to test whether a
result is correct. It's not acceptable when it's used for tasks
where the algorithms have social impact and the generated
assumptions on which it is based can't be audited.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #192 of 250: Bradley Westervelt (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 21 09:18

    
Via email from Bradley Westervelt:

Wicked problems explained to the layperson: SOTW MMXX!

I, too, am inspired by this annual forum, and have rarely chimed in.
Jane H's <inkwell.vue.510.174> finally set the fingers in motion. 
Her fine description of resilience and assertion it's hardly noted
in the prior discussion sweeps right past the charming observations
Bruce has made on Fashion, Balearic and otherwise.  That top layer
thing is hardest to surf, but it's where things are at: living in
the now.  Fashion reacts to all situations.  Fashion and resilience
are gemini, ne ces pas?  Pajama pants are definitely in.  Style and
comfort are the fruits of resilience.

And about seeing hope in Georgia election results. The narrow margin
of sanity is a result of an heroic effort fueled in reaction to
multi-faceted oppression of race and class. Georgia has goodness,
not so sure about Florida and its demographics.   Maybe next month
we'll have a paparazzi shots of the Spetsnaz MC patrolling
Mar-a-Lago...

>There hasn't been much climate discussion in this SOTW (sic)  

Does there need to be?  On the one side are the dying, persistent
embers of fossil fuel propaganda, on the other is Science, politely
continuing its measurements and assessments of the increasingly
hostile greenhouse we're all obligated to coinhabit.  Stories of
localized climate disaster nearly always beg  "could this be due to
climate change?" so frequently that it's clear a majority are on
this bus, understand it's real, even those ignorant of 350ppm get it
now.  Disaster tourism sidenote: the boatyard I was at last
Spring/Summer in Camden, Maine was hosting an expedition vessel that
couldn't get Danish permission to cruise the collapsing coasts of
Greenland, due to the pandemic.  

<https://www.yachtcharterfleet.com/luxury-charter-yacht-42559/noorderzon.htm>

The Atlantic just published a fine piece on Denial being the way of
the USA.  The capitol riot/insurrection brought an echo chamber on
the left to the fore with statements decrying "this is not who we
are".  Perhaps some are trying to express comfort with those words,
simply to ease the shock.  The T-shirt slogan used to be "If you're
not outraged, you're not paying attention".  Federal government
dismantling and perversion via the Executive branch has been
dumbfounding, such a mountain of lies creating their own reality. 
Note <inkwell.vue.510.185>:  *I think it could also be argued that
the USA has been without a functional government recently."  Then
note <inkwell.vue.510.182>:

   the war that matters is the war against the imagination
   all other wars are subsumed in it.
   Diane di Prima

The driven behavior of the Capitol riot folks was cosplay.  The
Family was watching and cheering it on, until it became clear larger
public sentiment wasn't going to celebrate the mob, then Ivanka
deleted her supportive tweets and The Family itself took shelter.

George M has written some very interesting notes, too, thank you so
much.  Also in note <inkwell.vue.510.182>, the Bucky quote continues
Fuller's vision that humanity is able to do itself in quite easily
if it doesn't get wise to its destructive behaviors.  Meanwhile,
nuclear arsenals continue to be maintained.  Because, uh, ya never
know when you might need to hit reset on civilization?   

Hope to be back for next year's discussion, y'all!  
- Bradley Westervelt (marooned futurist)
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #193 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 16 Jan 21 10:15

    
Off-duty police were part of the Capitol mob. Now police are turning
in their own.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/police-trump-capitol-mob/2021/01/16/16
0ace1e-567d-11eb-a08b-f1381ef3d207_story.html

I’m a fan of disproving simplistic slogans and complicating the
narrative, so this is pretty interesting. Although, as slogans go,
“there are police on both sides” seems like it would be pretty good,
at least gesturing in the direction of complexity and internal
politics. It seems humanizing. The idea of there being two sides
needs some work, though.

It seems too optimistic to suppose that the cognitive dissonance of
this will convince partisans to round towards uncertainty, though.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #194 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 16 Jan 21 10:39

    
Some clever early applications of machine learning are
generate-and-test, where the machine generates a few likely
possibilities and a human can look them over and pick the best one.
It seems like a good guard against inhuman failures, leaving us only
with the more comforting human ones.

There was a recent paper about generating images from text
descriptions, which seems like a way to replace artistic ability
with curation. Perhaps not world-changing, but a step up from stock
photos. Curation is easy when you can evaluate the results at a
glance.

https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/

Search engines seem like a good example too. If the result you want
is somewhere on the first page, that’s often good enough.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #195 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 16 Jan 21 10:58

    
I’m somewhat comforted by seeing papers exposing and partially
explaining fundamental flaws in machine learning approaches. It
seems like progress compared to stumbling around in the dark?

There are also interesting datasets highlighting particular flaws,
as a challenge to do better. For example, Google released one
recently that focuses on the tendency of machine learning-based text
generators to “hallucinate” facts not in their input.

Hallucination isn’t all bad since it has artistic possibilities, but
we did see a lot of hype this year around GPT-3’s ability to trick
people into finding their own meanings in vague words, much as song
lyrics often do. Or perhaps like Tarot cards. It’s quite fun to fool
around with as long as you don’t take it seriously.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #196 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 16 Jan 21 11:14

    
Brian, that last post slipped in while I was typing the below, and
is really intriguing--AI hallucinations is new to me. Human scrying
of phenomena to find omens in the random, and our endless ability to
understand even intended sentences wildly differently, that I've
thought about rather a lot.

Bradley W, I appreciate the expansion that fashion can be thought of
as a good instance of the omnipresence of resilience. I'll still
take it with a grain of vegetable-dyed organic cotton as a reply to
what I was wanting to invite in with my earlier post.

As for whether climate change need even be mentioned now in a
conversation about the State of the World, these lines by Czeslaw
Milosz: 

"To know and not to speak. / In that way one forgets. / What is
pronounced strengthens itself. / What is not pronounced tends to
non-existence."

Given what he lived through, I take the warning to heart.

I look to this annual conversation for observations in areas I know
nothing about, but I also look to it for news of grappling with what
matters most, in ways I haven't thought of.

Re AI deep learning--one project, The Earth Species Project, is
trying to translate animal utterance into something we humans might
understand. That would be transformative, if it works. It would also
raise to new visibility the same kinds of problems we see already
within human realms: if you think someone is somehow "less" than you
think yourself, if you think their well-being is at odds with your
own, how do you hear what they say? If they say it in ways
unfamiliar to your home-speech, how does that affect your taking it
in? Democracy and equality seem to be hard for people to live up to,
even when professed. What happens if the beyond-human had a voice at
the table? 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #197 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 16 Jan 21 11:21

    
These "hallucinations" illustrate vividly that AI can't be a
substitute for human judgment. In this case it's not moored to
reality.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #198 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 16 Jan 21 11:52

    
Oh, many thanks for the semiotic jazz track revealed in Bruce's posts
<185> through <189> -- and a cymbalic crash on the hi-hat for Brad
Neuberg's crossword-puzzle solo!

For a week (since Brian's email posted in <72>, I've been imagining the
famous scene from "The Graduate" only now expanded to *two* words:

  "Bounded Rationality"

Yes, we can see and hear what others are doing and saying -- and thanks
to our mirror neurons we can even live and walk in other's shoes to
some extent. But what we can't access are the data sets that other's
life experiences have thrown at the very lowest levels of their internal
neural stack.

One fascinating aspect of this whole problem of getting Machine Learning
systems to meaningfully 'show their work' is that the difficulties in
doing so reveal the possibility that, in many cases, even humans are
not really able to sensibly (or accurately) justify their thoughts or
actions.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #199 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 16 Jan 21 13:27

    
> What happens if the beyond-human had a voice at the table?

   "Ok, so I guess it's my turn to introduce myself. Hi! Im' Gregor
    Samsa and have recently recovered from the hallucination of being
    a traveling salesman. Apparently I was just part of some computer
    science experiment. Happy to leave those problems behind me and am
    looking forward to some lively conversations with my fellow
    philosophers at tonight's dinner event (hmmm... but are we missing
    some place settings?)."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #200 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 16 Jan 21 13:31

    
It may not be based on reality, but when the machine learning model
memorized a large chunk of the Internet, it generates right answers
often enough to sometimes be convincing. Sometimes the computer is
"hallucinating" and sometimes the reader is; we fill in gaps with
our own imagination by assuming that vaguely-coherent text comes
from an intelligent being. Eventually, you learn to see the gaps,
and the illusion falls apart.

Unless you want to believe, and some do.

There is an additional layer of illusion: usually the conversations
that people share online are cherry-picked. GPT-3 is like
autocomplete, and like we do when writing text with autocomplete,
it's easy to hit "undo" and try again when you get nonsense.

Here's an excerpt from a fun conversation I had. It's totally
cherry-picked, right or amusing answers only:

Q: Who is Sherlock Holmes?
A: He is a fictional detective in books and movies.
Q: Who is Captain James T. Kirk?
A: He is a fictional character in the TV series "Star Trek".
Q: Who else is in Star Trek?
A: Mr. Spock, Dr. "Bones" McCoy, Scotty, Uhura, Sulu, and Chekov are
also in Star Trek.
Q: Who is Beowulf?
A: He is a fictional character in the book of the same name.
Q: What did Beowulf do?
A: He killed Grendel's Mother and Grendel with his bare hands.
Q: What are some Star Trek quotes?
A: "To boldly go where no man has gone before.", "I'm giving her all
she's got, Captain!", and "Let's see what this baby can do!"
Q: What are some Lord of the Rings quotes?
A: "You shall not pass!", "One does not simply walk into Mordor.",
"My name is Legolas, and I am home.", and "If you want my advice,
drop the hammer."
Q: What are some accordion songs?
A: "Camptown Races", "Pop! Goes The Weasel", and "Oh! Susanna" are
some songs that an accordion can play.
Q: Who stole the Kishka?
A: Gollum stole the Kishka.
Q: What is Gollum?
A: He is a fictional character in the Lord of the Rings series.
Q: In which chapter does Gollum steal the Kishka?
A: He steals the Kishka in the chapter "Riddles in the Dark".
Q: Who is this?
A: This is Steve Martin.
Q: is the Kishka the One Ring?
A: No, the Kishka is not the One Ring.
Q: What does "Kishka" mean?
A: "Kishka" means "Intestines" in Russian.

More:
https://tildes.net/~games/qmc/ai_dungeon_dragon_model_upgrade#comment-5dcc
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #201 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 16 Jan 21 13:49

    
Brad Neuberg's reply quoted in #189 was brilliant--but doesn't the
word "next" have an 'e' in it? Maybe some joke there I'm missing?
"Only Allah can make something perfect"--the rug weavers' motto, and
so they take care to introduce an error.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #202 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 16 Jan 21 14:07

    
(a bit of slippage)

The Earth Species Project sounds interesting. It may offer additional
points from which we might triangulate new comprehensions.

With humans, it seems that some sort of socialization process is
inevitable (natural). Even in a "raised-by-wolves" scenario, there is
some socialization -- it's just not human.

Coming to grips with what some machine learning system is thinking may
be like the classic wasp experiment reported in Dean Wooldridge's book,
"Mechanical Man: The Physical Basis of Intelligent Life" (1968):

> When the time comes for egg laying, the wasp Sphex builds a burrow
> for the purpose and seeks out a cricket which she stings in such a
> way as to paralyze but not kill it. She drags the cricket into the
> burrow, lays her eggs alongside, closes the burrow, then flies away,
> never to return. In due course, the eggs hatch and the wasp grubs
> feed off the paralyzed cricket, which has not decayed, having been
> kept in the wasp equivalent of a deepfreeze.
>
> To the human mind, such an elaborately organized and seemingly
> purposeful routine conveys a convincing flavor of logic and
> thoughtfulness--until more details are examined.
>
> For example, the wasp's routine is to bring the paralyzed cricket
> to the burrow, leave it on the threshold, go inside to see that
> all is well, emerge, and then drag the cricket in. If the cricket
> is moved a few inches away while the wasp is inside making her
> preliminary inspection, the wasp, on emerging from the burrow,
> will bring the cricket back to the threshold, but not inside,
> and will then repeat the preparatory procedure of entering the
> burrow to see that everything is all right. If again the cricket
> is removed a few inches while the wasp is inside, once again she
> will move the cricket up to the threshold and reenter the burrow
> for a final check.
>
> The wasp never thinks of pulling the cricket straight in. On one
> occasion this procedure was repeated forty times, always with the
> same result.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #203 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 16 Jan 21 14:28

    
I do think "illusion" is a better term for this than "hallucination."

But even "illusion" is problematical... to the extent that some folks
are under the illusion that even "illusions" are not moored to reality.

"Illusion" is best used, imo, to make the point that what we see of our
surroundings is an interpretation. We simultaneously know this to be
true and tend to underestimate its extent.

So we are always overestimating the commonality of what we express in
common language.

The extremes of efforts like The Earth Species Project or attempts to
'rationalize' machine learning systems may help make this clear.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #204 of 250: Craig Maudlin (clm) Sat 16 Jan 21 15:01

    
> Sometimes the computer is
> "hallucinating" and sometimes the reader is; we fill in gaps with
> our own imagination by assuming that vaguely-coherent text comes
> from an intelligent being. Eventually, you learn to see the gaps,
> and the illusion falls apart.

Another interpretation is that some 'fast, automatic... and unconscious'
portions of our minds have learned from experience (have literally been
'trained') that there is something we want to call 'intelligence' behind
blocks of text we find to be meaningful.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #205 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Sat 16 Jan 21 15:07

    
Via email from George Mokray:

Thanks to Jane Hirshfield (jh) and Bradley Westervelt as they are
much appreciated.

Bruce Sterling (bruces):  "I'm waiting for this neural-net tech to
find some deeply consequential killer apps, and my best guess so far
would be protein-folding and computational chemistry.”

It’s happening: 
<https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-020-03348-4>

Alphabet’s Google’s DeepMind’s program AlphaFold can predict protein
folding structures of about 100 proteins.  But I suspect bruces
knows that already.

As to climate, Michael Mann and others are now saying that, if we
zero out the emission of greenhouse gases, the Earth will cool more
quickly than previously thought.  My study of geotherapy, maximizing
ecological systems to draw down carbon from the atmosphere, has
convinced me that, if we employ known geotherapeutic techniques
globally and consistently, we can speed the process even more while
improving the soil, the streams, and the oceans.  I have been lucky
to know some of the pioneers in this field, including Tom Goreau,
who is expanding on Wolf Hilbertz’ work with biorock (mentioned in
Sterling’s Islands in the Net back in the late 1980s) to restore
coral reefs. 

My recommendations for those who want to know more about geotherapy
are
Geotherapy: Innovative Methods of Soil Fertility Restoration, Carbon
Sequestration, and Reversing CO2 Increase Edited ByThomas J. Goreau,
Ronal W. Larson, Joanna Campe
<https://www.taylorfrancis.com/books/geotherapy-thomas-goreau-ronal-larson-joan
na-campe/e/10.1201/b13788>

the conferences organized by Biodiversity for a Livable Climate
which cover not only soil-related geotherapy but also freshwater,
ocean, and biodiversity techniques as well
<https://bio4climate.org/conferences/>

and Healing Earth:  An Ecologist's Journey of Innovation and
Environmental Stewardship by John Todd, an old and dear friend
<https://www.northatlanticbooks.com/shop/healing-earth/>

One of the many advantages of geotherapy is that it works at every
scale, from a flower pot to thousands of hectares, from the smallest
stream to the largest river.

I say geotherapy not geoengineering, please! but my experience in
wandering the lecture halls of Harvard and MIT has taught me that,
if the concept ever comes up, it is because I raise it.  Although
that may be beginning to change as people like Dr William Moonaw,
long of the IPCC, knows and talks about it often in relation to the
negative feedback loops we are setting up.  Recently, Dr Moomaw
participated in an online discussion with the Dalai Lama and Greta
Thunberg to introduce a short film series, Climate Emergency: 
Feedback Loops (<https://feedbackloopsclimate.com/>).

Unfortunately, there is not yet a Harvard/MIT Joint Seminar on
Geotherapy but there has been one on solar geoengineering for years
now, with plans to start setting up for experiments beginning in the
Spring.

My approach to climate change is
100% renewables ASAP
zero emissions economy ASAP
carbon drawdown ASAP
geotherapy (not geoengineering) ASAP

More at
<http://solarray.blogspot.com/2018/12/my-approach-to-climate-change.html>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #206 of 250: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Sat 16 Jan 21 15:11

    
Q: Who stole the Kishka?
A: Gollum stole the Kishka.

Doesn't work for me.  
Seems to be a Polka / Klezmer song. eg
<https://www.amazon.in/stole-Kishka-Goldberg-Odessa-Klezmer/dp/B000NQ2AJK>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #207 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 16 Jan 21 17:12

    
Yeah, I asked that question to be funny and see what it would do.
It's a song I play on accordion.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #208 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 16 Jan 21 18:39

    
Thanks, George. I know the Todds also-- while it's now closed down
and unlikely to be revived, with Bill Thompson's death this year a
sorrowful coda, I was part of the Lindisfarne Association with them
for some years. Please say hello from me, if you have the chance.

I like your "geotherapy, not geoengineering!" distinction. It's a
good example of our human fuzzy-association taking of meaning from
words that I believe (rightly? wrongly?) that I understand if not
exactly then generally correctly what you are saying by that. What
would an AI take from it?

And I appreciate that your post holds some hope of resiliences of
the most essential kind. If we choose to, we might still be able to
pull out of the death spiral. 

"On the last day of the world, I would plant a tree." -- W. S.
Merwin, whose amateur palm tree reserve in Maui, now the Merwin
Conservancy, is considered one of the best resources of palm tree
DNA on the planet.

Here's a link to the Earth Species project. 

<https://www.earthspecies.org/about#humans>

This is the first time I've gone back to the site since having seen
my first starling murmuration--their graphic depicting the 10,000
most used words in English looks quite like the starlings in some of
their milder-dramatic moments.  More dramatic, here:

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7WZTcBJmzDs>

Now would an AI associate these two things? My guess is not. It
would somehow be so familiar with so many more instances of things
that "look" to me like this, I assume that one wouldn't pull up the
other. (Forgive all the anthropomorphized language--not my field,
this.)

Some here will notice that one of the two Earth Species co-founders,
Aza Raskin, is also one of the founders of the Center for Humane
Technology (among other things). 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #209 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 17 Jan 21 03:42

    
> "how many of our apparently wicked problems will just yield some
day, like a solved riddle?"

We know how to solve climate change: we simply need to change our
behaviors (admittedly, we need to change them fairly drastically).
The wicked problem is how to solve climate change without doing so.
Which brings us back to that Buckminster Fuller quote. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #210 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 17 Jan 21 03:46

    
To belatedly respond to Jane's wonderful post (#174), I've found
some solace in recent days from sea shanties. Not the songs
themselves, which are redolent of the slaughter of intelligent
creatures and the exploitation of workers, but the spontaneous
crescendo of collaboration that they have incited among more or less
isolated people in different places. A pleasing reminder of how
social media can be used for creation and across the boundaries of,
at least, distance and (the literal sense of) ignorance.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #211 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 17 Jan 21 04:12

    
I'm preparing a presentation for tomorrow, which is rare for me in
that I usually wing or pants instead of preparing, but this one is
long, and in French, and I was requested to speak both about my
dissertation research (on local government improvisation in disaster
response) and science fiction. This is a bridge or amalgamation I've
been flirting with for a while, and I'm pleased to have a push to go
farther on it, but I find it challenging, both because of the
content and, perhaps because of the slightly different personae I
use in each profession.

In any case, I am going to speak on the role of imagination in
disaster response. I find that I seek to defend this topic even to
myself, because it feels frivolous (besides being not precisely what
my research is on; an expertise plus another expertise don't
necessarily result in an expertise on the combination), but the more
I look at it, the more important it feels. 

The House of Representatives report on Hurricane Katrina was titled
"A Failure of Initiative"; it's a silly title that they made sillier
by not defining initiative and then, in the body of the report,
criticizing it as often as they praised it. 

A failure of imagination might be more accurate. What is our failure
to act on what's coming but a failure of imagination, an inability
or unwillingness to fully envision the consequences? 

In the midst of a disaster, when situational awareness is often
limited, either by the lack of communications or by the limits of
our science, imagination is the only way to make decisions and act.
While experienced responders, or even first-time responders, can
often imagine a lot of the needs quite accurately, they tend to fail
when it comes to imagining the needs of the Other. (For example, I
was told independently by several male emergency responders in Japan
that it took them a long time, and in one case the intervention of
female military officers doing needs assessments, to remember that
women might need specific household products on a regular basis.)

But the failure that I find myself worrying most about right now is
the failure in learning from the disaster. The time immediately
after a disaster is typically the most fertile both for rallying
political will around preparedness and identifying the failures of
current response plans, but in the rush to avoid blame or any
quaking of the status quo, government response evaluations tend to
paint each disaster as unprecedented, unique, impossible to imagine
- and that carries over to the next, and the next. 
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #212 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Sun 17 Jan 21 04:22

    
This failure or, more often, devaluing of imagination is a problem
fairly pervasive in our society. I am not a luddite or
anti-rationalist; I believe in facts and I value numbers and
measurement. But rationalism and associated principles like
neutrality and objectivity have overrun their limits in our society;
they've been appropriated and misused for the opposite of the
purposes which they are supposed to serve. We need to find ways of
using them that allow space for the unquantifiable, for emotion and
connection, for plural subjectivity instead of the illusion of a
single correct and abstaining viewpoint, for uncertainty, for
beauty, for rigorous opinions and evidence-based creativity.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #213 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 17 Jan 21 05:59

    
I worked on the Katrina Peoplefinder Project, described at
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katrina_PeopleFinder_Project> and in
more detail at
<https://web.archive.org/web/20120127141032/http://www.worldchanging.com/archiv
es/003437.html>. One effect of a disaster like Katrina is that people disperse and lose track of each other. It can be hard to know who of your relatives and close friends are safe and alive, and to track them down especially if they've been sent to a shelter somewhere. Hundreds of thousands of people had been displaced.

Ka-Ping Yee had worked at Berkeley on the problem of tracking
survivors of 9/11 and getting diverse bits of information from
unstructured data into a structured format so that you could have a
single authoritative registry. He had developed PFIF, the People
Finder Information Format, for that purpose.
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/People_Finder_Interchange_Format> He
brought the format and the thinking behind it to the People Finder
Project, where we had people writing scripts to retrieve
unstructured data about survivors from various sources and put the
data into PFIF. We also had teams of people adding data that
couldn't be handled by scripts, and doing error correction. One
recollection I have is how we were having a hard time getting
traditional organizations like Red Cross to work with us. Salesforce
and Google eventually got involved.

A second project, called Shelter Finder, emerged as we saw the
problem of tracking all the popup shelters that were emerging to
take people in. Finding people was partly about having data about
where they might be.

We were an ad hoc group of volunteers who knew something about
technology, working together with some degree of agility to help
with a problem that was often not handled well if at all following
that kind of disaster. We'd had some experience (via Worldchanging
connections) with the same problem following the Southeast Asian
Tsunami.

We talked a lot about building technical disaster relief teams for
future disasters, and there might have been some of that. But it's
hard to get people to prepare for future disaster, that sense of
urgency fades over time and you forget the fragility of
infrastructure and relationships that had been so apparent when you
were in the thick of it.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #214 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 17 Jan 21 07:58

    
Part of leadership is the ability to get people to follow you.
Imagination is equally important, the ability to anticipate the
consequence of different possible courses of action and to choose a
good one. This imagination needs to be coupled with the authority to
take action.

The US was a month late in rolling out tests for COVID-19 last
winter. The leaders who had the authority to fix this lacked the
imagination to anticipate the consequences of delay and the sense of
urgency this imagination should have driven. The same is true of the
drinking water disaster in Flint, Michigan.

In Florida Rebekah Jones had the correct insight that it was
necessary to collect and to disseminate life-saving information, and
she had the personal initiative to do it herself when she didn't
have support from the state. She's being punished now for
embarrassing the people who had the authority and decided not to do
this.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #215 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 17 Jan 21 11:21

    
This last run of posts is a joy to read...  

Malka, that presentation (good luck with delivering it!) sounds both
a thrilling and a direly needed reminder. 

Both your post and karish's point out how much a CYA mentality
damages both immediate action and later learning. (Svetlana
Alexievich's _Voices From Chernobyl_ comes to mind as a marriage of
investigative reporting/recording and Alexievich's leap of
imagination in inventing the genre  -- a kind of 180 degree
journalistic invention to Hunter S. Thompson's -- as a way to keep
available and real the evidence of failure's depths,
lack-of-empathy's costs, and also, in other dimensions, emotion's
reach.) 

There are models in medicine for dealing with this--the post-event
analysis of why something went wrong, undertaken in a way understood
as collectively necessary and, ideally, non-punitive. Maybe that's
because medicine is one long ongoing crisis, just crisis after
crisis after crisis with life-and-death consequences. So they had to
figure out a structural way to avoid CYA increase of stupidity as
best they could.

jonl, that post-Katrina work is such a good example of the kind of
thing I associate with Rebecca Solnit's A Paradise Built in Hell.
Including the Red Cross not wanting to accept the assistance of an
ad hoc, newly-imagined solution that wasn't in their own fiefdom.


And if just want to say thank you in particular, Malka, for your
post 212--that's one of the most additive, and beautiful, paragraphs
I've read in a long time.  It lays out, not least, the map for why
art exists, and for why the arts are a necessary ally to the
investigations of science in the bettering of lives.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #216 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 17 Jan 21 12:59

    
Normally we end the State of the World conversation after two weeks.
If we did that, tomorrow would be the last day. However there's so
much happening, including the inauguration scheduled later this week
- I think it makes sense to extend by a week, through January 25.

I haven't asked <bruces> and <malka> about this. They committed to
be here for two weeks, and might not have time to stay in the
conversation for another week. But they, and all others, are
encouraged to keep posting.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #217 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 21 13:05

    
We're getting close to done here.  It's been edifying. 

I've got a new book coming out this year, a book I've been working
on for a decade: a collection of Italian-themed science fiction
stories.

Being a guy who, for twenty years, has written about the "State of
the World," I've long had some vague ambition to  write a "regional
novel about the Planet Earth."   That's a conceptual challenge for
me, the challenge of global localism, "glocalism," "think globally
act locally;" there's something Whole Earth about this set of
concepts, which are  often on my mind as I traipse about the whole
earth.  

Also, regional novels interest me.   Their constraints often give
them a paradoxical universality.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #218 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 21 13:06

    

I didn't know how to go about regionalizing the Whole Earth, though,
and that noble effort seemed a bit like a ladder-to-the-Moon.   So
instead I decided to try some regional writing about the city of
Turin.  As in, how local can a foreigner get?  And what about the
world's regionalized varieties of science fiction — Italian
"fantascienza" as an Italian literary genre?

Thus the imminent publication of "Robot Artists and Black Swans, the
Italian Fantascienza Stories," which are stories of mine mostly
written for the Italian fantascienza markets and first published in
Italy.  

https://tachyonpublications.com/product/robot-artists-and-black-swans-the-ital
ian-fantascienza-stories-of-bruce-sterling-as-bruno-argento/

Since arriving in Italy, I've written maybe one fantascienza work
per year — and I thought of them as being rather like Italo Calvino
literary pranks.     "Invisible Cities" is an effort I much admire.
In this  famous work, the Italian Marco Polo confronts the Grand
Mongol Emperor, the World Potentate who seems unsure of the nature
and the boundaries of the world over which he presides.   So Marco
Polo, who seems possessed by a strange mathematical rigor, chants to
the Emperor, "Well, there's a city named this-and-that, and all the
people are like such-and such.   Next, there's a different city
named this and it's unique because of that," and somehow this
rattling Calvino ensemble has the mind-bending effect of being
thrown through a medieval atlas.  There's an Amor Mundi
world-wonderment to it.  It's regional, fantastic, and about the
whole Earth.

As a college student I first bought "Invisible Cities" in a used
bookstore for one dollar.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #219 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 21 13:06

    

Decades later, I met Calvino's widow in Italy and I told her about
my bookstore bargain. Calvino first met his wife in Paris, where she
was an Argentine technical translator who specialized in nuclear
power issues for the United Nations.  There was something very
carbon-rod in the nuclear pile about Chichita Calvino.  You could
tell she'd spent a lot of her womanly time tying up the husband's
shoelaces and rescuing his abandoned, smoldering coffee-pots.  She
was quite the stern guardian of his literary heritage, too; a
nobody's-fool grand-dame, chain smoking French cigarettes and doing
shots of grappa while in her eighties.  It encouraged me to get to
know her a little, it somehow set my feet on the ground and felt
civilized and humane; even Marco Polo himself, literary legend, was
once some genuine Venetian guy with a Mrs Polo and the little
daughter Polo.

Calvino's role as a model encouraged me,  and  I gave my Italian
fantascienza project some serious thought.  Likely I even
overthought it some.   There are works of Calvino's that are so
"motto pensato" that Calvino himself probably forgot what he was up
to— they're so intellectualized that they're arch, over-baked and
verging on daffy, much like Umberto Eco making his erudite semiotic
jokes for an audience of mostly himself.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #220 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 21 13:06

    

So in my experimental Turinese stories I assumed I was likely
overdoing it, not exactly "self-indulgent," but something like
building ships from toothpicks inside a Turinese bottle.  However,
now that the collection is assembled and published, and it's got a
couple of intros and an afterword and even some nice illustrations,
I can see that ROBOT ARTISTS AND BLACK SWANS is one of my better
books.  Instead of being desiccated, cranky and erudite, it reads
like some 1970s psychedelic Metal Hurlant French bande dessinee —
it's brightly colored and even somewhat European comic-booky, and
rockets right along despite all its squinchy pen-and-ink detailing. 


As it happens, Italian SF fans don't much like Italian regional
stories. Instead, they like space operas and mutant cyborg vampires,
just like all the other cool genre people.  However, the Italians
are impressed that I could somehow create a book that entirely lacks
America's normal cliches about Italy.  Instead, my hybridized,
sampled "American fantascienza" is composed of truly peculiar
Italian elements that 95% of Italians don't know about or care
about.  

The book's narrative impetus is all in how much the *author* cares
about it — he's super-into his Italian wunderkammer collection. 
He's piling up centuries of Italian minutiae with the glee of
Tolkien naming his elves.  It's like watching some street-clown
making Italian balloon animals — there's not much common-sense to
it, but his obsession is endearing.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #221 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 17 Jan 21 13:07

    

The author's search engines, in particular, are so ferocious that
genuine, traditional Italian regional fiction could never pack so
much Italian regionalism into a text.   The book is native 21st
century writing, with a dizzying Google-erudition packed, jammed,
overstuffed into every page.   There's a crammed-prose cyberpunk
feeling of a newfangled form of historical writing which no merely
human historian's brain, fingers and fountain-pen could possibly
contain.   Only a digital-humanities guy would want to stack up so
many terabytes of loosely-networked something-or-other.  It feels
like the difference between an Italian Renaissance lutenist and a DJ
with a ProTools set-up that's full of Italian Renaissance lute
samples.

Also, the stories are funny.  They're amusing, not in the Umberto
Eco donnish-maestro way, but in the Mark Twain "Innocents Abroad"
way, as in "Why are the tragicomic pranks of mankind so absurdly
various?"

So I'm pleased about my new book, and there's more such work to
come.  There are similar fantascienza stories not collected in this
volume,  and I've written some new ones since.  There seems to be
water in that cistern for me.  The bucket's rusty and the crank is
slow, but the water's potable.  It tastes pretty good in its export
bottles, even.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #222 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 17 Jan 21 14:31

    
The book sounds fantastic, bruces. Congratulations and, as Ovid said
of his mss mailed off from exile, and the Well writers conference
members like to say here: "Go, little book."

Yet another tradition of outsider's-eye seeing what locals may not
(because differently curious, and because peripheral vision is
needed, even physiologically, for some kinds of seeing) comes to
mind from what you say also: a kind of Turinesqe Toqueville.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #223 of 250: Alex Davie (icenine) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:03

    
A tiny story about imagination and disaster response...I mobilized
from Atlanta on the first flight in to Baton Rouge, Louisiana after
Katrina had left building, rented a car and drove directly to our
Company's HQ in downtown Baton Rouge, a 12 story building chock full
of corporate types top to bottom...

I personally was responsible for our emergency response contract
with the U. S. Postal Service so I was there to respond to the USPS
needs during the aftermath and was on the Task Force within the
Company to respond to all the ER contracts, present and future...and
as such, I observed early on, in the first few days the desire and
the subsequent contract to pump out New Orleans...which we did, in
record time, astonishing the US Army Corps of Engineers and the City
of New Orleans...

I voiced this sentiment, before we got the contract from the US Army
Corps of Engineers, to pump out New Orleans, to wit:

Forget pumping out New Orleans, let the floodwaters recede
naturally, then give the people and the governments 30 days to
retrieve their schtuff and abandon the City since it was built below
sea level and it was inevitable that it would flood again in the
future and come back in 20 years and see if the Mississippi had
changed course again and then re-build...

As you might imagine that went over like a lead balloon to those I
expressed it to...there was too much money on the table to made so I
never said it again in the sixty days I was there responding to
Katrina..
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #224 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:21

    
I know that we're in a disaster and we're in for a lot more
disasters.

People such as Dr Malka who are intimate with disasters are the
avant-garde among us.

"Armageddon" is boring, because the clock stops ticking and there's
nothing left to think about or to say, but  disastrous times are
different.  It's much like dwelling on the slopes of a volcano. 
Awful things happen, with various time-lines and various scales of
awful, but that's where you live, that's your home.  Yes, it's
risky, but you've got a vineyard and a cradle.

Southern Italy is like that.  It's beautiful and fertile but it's
poor, and you can venture there from Northern Italy, and you wonder
"where  are all the monuments?"  There just aren't many: the
earthquakes knocked them down.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #225 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:29

    

Every once in a while you get a huge monument that the volcano
buried completely.  It was some once-thriving place destroyed by
disaster so utterly that everybody forgot its existence.  Then
somebody unearths Pompeii and they set to digging it back up again. 
Been at the antique-mining for a couple of centuries, so far.  "The
fire-born are at home in fire," but these are the fire-killed and
their town came back, out of the ashes.

The ruins of Pompeii tend to fall down a lot.  They're frail. In the
middle of the ruins there's a pizza joint.

Surprising numbers of living people move through the streets of
Pompeii. Enough that, even though it's a skeleton of a Roman town,
it kinda resembles a contemporary tourist town.  You have to wonder
how often people meet a romantic stranger there and get married.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/albums/72157691079882835
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #226 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:30

    

Our world has "we brought this on ourselves" disasters, and then
it's got the dinosaur-killing comet variety of disasters.  
Climate-crisis disasters, and a pandemic like Covid-19, they both
get a lot of blameworthy finger-pointing, recrimination, and guilt,
but I kinda like the poetic, majestic purity of utterly nonhuman
disasters.

Last year,  the ill-starred MMXX, there was a big "Gamma Ray Burst"
through the solar system, known as  "GRB 204015A."  This was a
powerful split-second flare at 4:42am U.S. Eastern Time on April 15,
2020.  The flare missed the whole Earth but was detected by
satellite instruments out around the orbit of Mars.  It was a
neutron-star eruption so violent that it moved-the-needle even
though it arose from another galaxy eleven million light years away.
The "Sculptor Galaxy," which abides in a different group of galaxies
than the Milky Way's "Local Cluster."

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sculptor_Galaxy

So the Earth was attacked from another galaxy.   Okay, not any major
threat to us — it might disturb a phone call or two, or two million
phone calls, who knows — but I dread to think what that massive
disaster must have done to its own galaxy.  

The Sculptor Galaxy, it's a little livelier than ours, star-wise,
but it's a perfectly decent-looking, respectable galaxy.  Yet they
have a"magnetar" whipping around at insane speeds and basically
irradiating everything in the path of its wobbly, jittery
gamma-ray-beam — supernova levels of violence, but packed into a
firehose, more or less.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #227 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:30

    


Imagine that you're an artsy extraterrestrial civilization over in
the  "Sculptor Galaxy" and this chaotic monster cuts loose on your
planet. Not a lot of wise policy decisions to be made about that
prospect, really. You don't need to fret much over your disaster
prepper supplies.

I wonder what that event would look and feel like.  Presumably it
just peels the sky off in a fraction of a second, so likely there
wouldn't be much grand, sublime spectacle to admire, but there's
something Miltonian, Dantesque about it.  It's so beyond normal
astrophysics that it verges on metaphysics; even your Elon Musk Mars
colony wouldn't escape the blast; probably even your Sun would be
sucker-punched by the beam and would never be the same Sun again. 
And all because of a genuine "bad star," you know, a literal
"dis-aster."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #228 of 250: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 18 Jan 21 06:32

    

There's something calming about contemplating a disaster of this
truly grand kind.  I don't know why, but I can't find it
frightening.  It's like you're ranking the woes of your troubled
world on a scale of one to ten and you realize that somewhere else
there's a scale of a hundred thousand.  

Here's looking forward to State of the World episode 21.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #229 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 18 Jan 21 09:12

    
I suppose, sometime in the barely imaginable future, someone will
build a pizza joint in the middle of the remains of that Sculptor
Galaxy neuron star.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #230 of 250: Andrew Alden (alden) Mon 18 Jan 21 11:15

    
The U.S. federal government has suffered a Katrina event. I hope the
recovery to come will be carried out better than the one in New Orleans.

There are disaster experts who show up after "natural disasters" (which are
only human disasters due to insensate natural processes). Do we have
competent experts on hand to advise us after this political disaster?
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #231 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Mon 18 Jan 21 11:28

    
Another area where we have a significant event in our society is the
COVID pandemic.  There's a wide swath of the patient-facing sector
of health care that is under risk of PTSD and burn-out.  This also
would be true of first responders and outlying areas like
morticians.

Tomorrow morning it seems clear the US will have hit 400,000 deaths
and 24 million cases, and most likely 500,000 deaths by the end of
February.

I haven't heard of anyone or anything looking to address this
aspect.  It doesn't even get into the patients themselves or their
families.  
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #232 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Mon 18 Jan 21 12:04

    
I can't imagine the sort of hours these people have worked, with
what sort of lack of equipment, and some of them have been asked to
do battlefield-type triage, due to lack of staff, resources or
oxygen.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #233 of 250: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 19 Jan 21 12:18

    
When grim milestones are announced, I wonder if we've hit the
halfway point on deaths yet. I guess the halfway point will be close
to the end, when the exponential curve turns into something else. It
still looks exponential, though.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #234 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 19 Jan 21 13:40

    
Possibly exponential, but hard to assess the impact of the vaccine
at this point, and of new strategies and tactics from the Biden
administration. OTOH we have potential increases in the R0,
evidently because of new strains that are more infectious. Not sure
how to model a prediction, given uncertainties.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #235 of 250: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 19 Jan 21 13:47

    
The number of new infections grows exponentially as long as Rt, the
effective reproduction number, is greater than one. Rt is a factor
of the constant k in the growth equation: r(t) = e**kt + C
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #236 of 250: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Tue 19 Jan 21 15:35

    
I'm definitely feeling a bit more hopeful today. And every time one
of us gets their shots, I cheer.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #237 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Wed 20 Jan 21 04:24

    
Jane, thank you for your kind words in #215; they helped me feel
better about the presentation, although I think it's a topic I need
to continue to work on and refine. It's difficult applying the logic
of academic rigor and rationality to a talk that is in part
critiquing same. 

One of the questions I got at said presentation (technical aside, in
case the idea is useful to anyone: after my talk the organizers put
me in a breakout room while the students discussed their questions,
organized them into themed groups, and chose spokespeople for each
theme, after which I was brought back into the main zoom) was
whether history repeats itself or we are living through something
new, and it seems an apt question to bring up here. My answer (like
my answer to the question of whether we're living in a utopia or a
dystopia) was both (or neither). One hundred-odd years after a
pandemic, looking at the newspaper articles from that time about
people wearing masks or refusing to, it's hard not to feel a certain
cyclicality; and yet, looking at, oh, vaccine timelines or virtual
work, art, and connections, or even the inadequate but existent
considerations of how to provide the vaccines for the countries
whose governments can't afford it, we are in a very different place.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #238 of 250: Malka Older (malka) Wed 20 Jan 21 04:26

    
Meanwhile, the inauguration is in a few hours, draped in extensive,
highly militarized security. I really hope that it will be free from
disruption and violence. 

If it is, there will be hot takes of the "See? The threat was
exaggerated" variety. Reactions like that after swine flu etc are
part of why we were so terribly underprepared for covid: "the
low-/medium-/high-probability disaster didn't happen this time
therefore it won't happen" is not solid reasoning.And of course the
preparedness itself affects how bad the impacts of the event are
(which is part of why emergency management/disaster risk reduction
is such a thankless job: if it goes well, no one notices). In this
case that's particularly true because of the heavy deterrence
approach.

Anyway, let's hope annoying hot takes are the worst consequence.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #239 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 20 Jan 21 05:48

    
I woke this morning realizing that insurgents were unlikely to
attempt an attack when it's expected and when a deterrent is in
place. A lack of protest or rioting today won't mean we've seen the
last of them. On the other hand, the catalyzing presence of Q might
fade, and take with it some of the energy fueling the protests.

As Trump always said, "We'll see what happens."
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #240 of 250: George Mokray (jonl) Wed 20 Jan 21 05:49

    
Via email form George Mokray:

Italo Calvino meets Martin Luther King Jr
<https://www.brainpickings.org/2017/02/13/italo-calvino-racism/>

Calvino’s posthumously published writings on his visit to the USA
may be useful to a certain Texan in Turin, a sort of turnabout
mirror to mirror.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #241 of 250: Kevin Gould (jonl) Wed 20 Jan 21 05:49

    
Via email from Kevin Gould:

I'm enjoying your eloquent rants and rambles. Please continue.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #242 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 21 Jan 21 10:57

    
Joe Biden is the USA's new leader, and he's actually working pretty
hard. Looking at all he's doing and all he has to do, I fall into a
state of near exhaustion just considering it all. We've already
re-committed to the World Health Organization and sent (virtual)
Fauci to meet with 'em. Biden signed 17 executive orders his first
day, many of them intended to undo damage from the last
administration. 

Meanwhile there'll be no Trump china:
<https://www.cnn.com/2021/01/21/politics/trump-white-house-china/index.html> This is too bad, because I was envisioning a "bull in the china shop" design.

Oh,well...
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #243 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Thu 21 Jan 21 11:31

    
I have a vague curiosity what Trump will have for his official
portrait.  I don't suppose it would be one of Jon McNaughton
bombastic works, though that would be fitting.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #244 of 250: Angie Coiro (coiro) Thu 21 Jan 21 11:34

    
It can be cold and quick: a poop emoji.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #245 of 250: Elaine Sweeney (sweeney) Thu 21 Jan 21 16:15

    
Personally I like this one:

<https://www.instagram.com/p/CKSDdCXh8w7/>
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #246 of 250: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 22 Jan 21 06:49

    
I thought we might have more to say following the inauguration,
hence the extension of the State of the World an extra week - but
we're not particularly active now. I want to thank <bruces> and
<malka> for joining and contributing, as well as all the others
who've posted here, and contributed via email.

Each State of the World conversation is in what we call a 'topic' on
the WELL, in what we call a 'conference' called <inkwell.vue.>. If
you're reading this and you're not a member of the WELL, but would
like to join conversations like this, please consider joining:
<https://www.well.com/join/>

We don't have to end the conversation now, though I think our guests
have dropped off. Members of the WELL should feel free to keep
posting observations here. If you're not a member of the WELL, you
can send an email to inkwell at well.com - we'll continue to post
those through Monday, January 25.

Let's hope for a relatively boring but consequential 2021.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #247 of 250: Ari Davidow (ari) Fri 22 Jan 21 08:42

    
amen
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #248 of 250: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Fri 22 Jan 21 13:50

    
Thanks, Jon.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #249 of 250: Andrew Alden (alden) Fri 22 Jan 21 16:19

    
Nice to have some extra perspective during a tumultuous time.
  

inkwell.vue.510 : State of the World 2021
permalink #250 of 250: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 22 Jan 21 23:21

    
Grateful to all here for the conversation, and Malka's closing
comment and passing along of the question without single answer--I
got caught up in inauguration watching and aftermath, and didn't see
it until now.

It is indeed such a great relief to see the new year finally fully
started. 

May the next State of the World conversation find some of the
current hopes bearing fruit.
  

