inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #0 of 104: Hal Royaltey (hal) Thu 28 Dec 06 23:23

    
In what has become a much anticipated annual event Well member Bruce Sterling
returns to take look at the state of the world as we enter this new year.  
Joining Bruce is Well member Jon Lebkowsky, Bruce's regular partner in these 
adventures in highly-informed speculation.


Bruce Sterling - author, journalist, editor, and critic, was born in 1954.  
Best known for his eight science fiction novels, he also writes short stories, 
book reviews, design criticism,  opinion columns, and introductions for books 
ranging from Ernst Juenger to Jules Verne.   His nonfiction works include 
THE HACKER CRACKDOWN: LAW AND DISORDER ON THE ELECTRONIC FRONTIER (1992) and 
TOMORROW NOW: ENVISIONING THE NEXT FIFTY YEARS (2003).  He is a contributing 
editor of WIRED magazine.

He also writes a weblog, and runs a website and Internet mailing list on the 
topic of environmental activism and postindustrial design.  In 2005, he was 
the "Visionary in Residence" at Art Center College of Design in Pasadena.

He has appeared in ABC's Nightline, BBC's The Late Show, CBC's Morningside, 
on MTV and TechTV, and in Time, Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal, the New 
York Times, Fortune, Nature, I.D., Metropolis, Technology Review, Der Spiegel, 
La Repubblica, and many other venues. 


Jon Lebkowsky has been active online since the 1980s, when he learned that 
computers could form networks, and that computer networks are environments 
for communication, group-forming, and community-building. Since then he's 
worked as a writer, publisher, web and social network consultant, online 
community developer, project manager, and technology director. He's currently 
a parter at Polycot Consulting, Inc., a company he cofounded in 2001, and 
chairman of a nonprofit called AssistOrg, which will provide web development 
and consulting services to NPOs.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #1 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 29 Dec 06 06:40

    
I just wrote yesterday that 2006 felt like a transitional year to me,
mentioning digital convergence and broader acceptance of green thinking,
especially about climate change, as a couple of markers. I didn't think to
mention the evident, belated realization that the Iraq adventure was a
colossal mistake and the related rejection of neoconservative strategic
thinking.

Before we consider 2007 and beyond, what are your thoughts about 2006? What
struck you as the Big Stories?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #2 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 29 Dec 06 10:20

    <scribbled by bruces Fri 29 Dec 06 10:41>
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #3 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 29 Dec 06 10:43

    
*Here I am, logging in this year from Belgrade, Serbia.


*I agree that 2006 wasn't one of those big dramatic
2001-style years when everybody agrees that all bets
are off and then they start shoving each other through
the keyhole of their own strategies.  It looked to
me like a year when the world was on autopilot and
deeper trends just kept piling up.

*First, the US mission in Iraq got pretty severely
un-accomplished.  Now that this has finally been
publicly admitted, the US is in for two years of lame-duckness.
Bush can't do much; he spent all his credibility and
the country's wealth in his military adventure.  
The previous Congress wanted to do as little as possible,
while the new Congress doesn't know what it wants and
doesn't have a big enough majority to do anything
radical.  

*In 2006, the rest of the world finally learned 
how to ignore the USA.  The US has no diplomatic or
economic soft-power initiatives to offer, and nobody's
eager to mimic their line of development, so they
frankly don't matter much.  The US probably hasn't
looked this bewildered and helpless since before
World War I.

*Everybody wants to disown neocon strategy,
including the neocons, because that strategy
never worked.  Still, it was, in point of fact,
a strategy.  Nobody else has one.

*Europe didn't exhaust its military hard-power (because
it scarcely has any) and it's doing more than
okay economically. but it definitely bogged down in
imperio-political overstretch.  It doesn't know how to
govern the host of new territories it has agglomerated.
The governing class had some swell ideas and the
voting population spat on those, so Europe is
in for another sleepy, python-like digestive period.

On the plus side, Germany seems to have finally managed
that feat and is looking perkier than it has since reunification.
This is a cheery sign that all these Eastern European
newhires are gonna catch a clue eventually, so
the expansion will pay off someday.
There really isn't a counterforce eager to scourge and crush
Europe, so it can blunder along Hapsburg-Empire style
for at least a while.  Those left out of Europe are gonna
get resentful, but they may cling to each other
for comfort rather than get all aggressive.

*Russia was the winner of the War for Oil, so they've
learned how to turn off the gas taps and wax all petrocratic.
Unfortunately they're run by a tiny Czarist-style
clique of spooky Rasputin radioactive poison fanatics,
so when their shadow crosses the global landscape
everybody crosses their fingers and shies away.
Luckily, a surprising number of guys they managed
to poison, ambush and shoot were Chechen warlords,
so their personal Islamic crisis is on the back burner.

*Castro got sick, but Chavez is the new Castro and
he's got megatons of oil.  Chavez could do whatever he wants,
but he's not very bright and he likes the look of his
own face in the mirror better than any sight in the world.
History will likely judge that Castro and even Bolivar
get much the same assessment.

*There were no massive hurricanes in the US this year,
but typhoons kicked the hell out of Asia, and Australia
is having the worst drought in a thousand years. Everybody's
been figuring climate change for a poor man's problem,
mostly because the Left own the green issue and they're
very big on social issues, but Australia is a right-wing
state full of rich white guys, and they may be more
direly vulnerable to climate change than any nation in the
world.  

*Ethiopia is a Christian state and decided to invade
Somalia before the weird Islamic-court non-state there
got totally out of hand.  Ethiopia has something
akin to a national army, so they rumbled right into Somalia
with the same armored glee that Israel showed in south Lebanon,
NATO showed in Afghanistan and the US did in Iraq.
I can't imagine that this is going to end well.

*Al Qaeda's strategy has been dominant since 9/11.
It's to crack nation-states apart by killing so many
innocents that daily life becomes unendurable.
They didn't launch any major action in 2006; with
Afghanistan and Iran ungovernable and Israel at
their wits' ends behind towering walls, they
probably figure they're winning.  They probably
are, but whenever they do win, they're like
a gang of weasels who've caught a car.

*Al Qaeda can't govern; they just produce chaos.
Hezbollah is a paramilitary terror network that can
almost manage to govern. Sort of.  The Islamic Courts
in Somalia weren't even terrorists; they are
a serious-minded justice system very interested in law and
order, but they were home-made courts without a legislature
or an executive, so they're not a legitimate state and
states want nothing to do with them.  Islamic peoples
has never thrived in the alien Westphalian nation-state
system.  Unfortunately they thrive even worse outside of it.

*I think there were two polities in 2006 who
really managed to play their cards right: India
and China. If you were Indian or Chinese, 2006
felt like solid progress and you'd love more of
the same.  Given that the two of them are a major
chunk of the planet's population, 2006 wasn't that
bad a year.  The least-reported major story of
the year was probably that China and India
seriously and thoughtfully decided to make nice
with each other.  I think they looked at their
global shipping figures and they figured out that they
are no longer regional rivals.  A "region" doesn't
matter worth a damn any more.  Their ambitions are
global, and it makes a lot more great-power sense
to tackle the world shoulder-to-shoulder than it
does to try to divvy up Asia.

*In conclusion, I'd agree that there is a frenzy
of creative green thinking this year.  I've
never seen the like.  Unfortunately, green doing,
as opposed to thinking, is about forty years overdue.
Even though there's quite a lot of green doing, too,
it's starting mighty small.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #4 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 29 Dec 06 16:03

    
How can we ramp it up? I've been working with Worldchanging, and we talk a 
lot about solutions, and we find a few, but I'm wondering how to orchestrate 
the solutions so that they synergize and produce something more than a lot of 
ahas and back-patting?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #5 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 30 Dec 06 05:48

    
Sell out, man.  That's the answer.  It's gotta be money.  Huge amounts
of money.  Ford and Rockefeller amounts of money.  There isn't any
worlchanging mechanism that moves as fast, as ruthlessly, as
comprehensively as the market. 

You could do it with state intervention, if you had a really stout,
solid, honest, well-governed state, but there aren't any left.  Not
even one.  The global market ate all of them.  It ate the state system
so comprehensively that there are big scary gaps in the planet with no
states at all. 

It's gonna take a tremendous amount of money to fix a soiled planetary
atmosphere.  There's never been a state-sponsored project that size. 
Not even close.  It makes the Hoover Dam look like a cork.

You look around at people taking serious remediary steps...
they're not politicians.  They're not shoestring activists and Seattle
99ers.  They're rich moguls.  Michael Bloomberg.  Vinod Khosla. 
Richard Branson.  The Google boys.  Wal-Mart.  Two percent of the
population, the financial super-elite, owns fifty percent of the
planet.  

I'm not saying that's a good situation, or that its politically smart
to suck up to such profoundly antidemocratic characters, but they're
the only ones with levers in their hands.

I'm a science fiction writer.  I'm a guy who's pretty good
at a-has.  I don't flatter myself that I'm great at orchestrating
solutions.  I've never been elected dog-catcher and I've never had an
employee.  

I love Worldchanging; those guys rock, but it may be time to stop
throwing so much visionary spaghetti at the walls and try to converge
on some set of notions that might become real solutions.
That may not be a proper job for people with Worldchanging's
considerable talents.  It wouldn's surprise me much to see something
seriously freaky emerging: a rich guy's Worldchanging, something like a
covert, hugely wealthy, braniac, mogul-saturated Project for a New
Atmospheric Century.  You might see the occasional white-paper pop out,
and the rest of it would just be... vast mechanical grinding.

Even in a world like that one, though, the visionary a-ha thing
shouldn't be neglected or dismissed.  It's honest work. It does matter.
 Doesn't take much of a budget... that's its drawback and its saving
grace.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #6 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 30 Dec 06 10:28

    
So the rich and powerful still run the show, despite all the lip
service paid to supposed democracy. We still have whole movements
scrambling to adopt technologies that will give everybody a voice in
the governance discussion, and we spend volumes of money and energy on
political campaigns that hope to sway the voters this way or that. Does
the collective intelligence matter? Does it matter whether the average
joe or jolene is informed about what's happenging, and has something
to say about it?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #7 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 31 Dec 06 02:59

    
I don't think today's rich and powerful "run the show" -- in the sense
that there used to be a coherent show and it used to be runnable. 
Today's rich and powerful are meritocrats and plutocrats, rather than
some class-based old-school-tie phalanx Establishment.   Any earlier
set of the rich-and-powerful would have regarded contemporary players
like Gates and Soros and Perot and Berlusconi and Murdoch and Bloomberg
and bin Laden to be strange, jumped-up, arriviste, nouveau-riche
types, crazily unstable pretenders who don't even bother to send their
daughters to the cotillion ball.

We really need some new class-term for these modern tycoons who've
been flung into the planetary stratosphere by today's amazingly unequal
wealth distributions.  "Mogul" is a pretty good revived word.  It
suggests that current Russian model of five or six guys who've divvied
up a national economy into privatized secretive satrapies that exist
outside the rule of law.   

But to imagine that some mogul in exile in London, sweating bullets
over radioactive poison, is really "running the show..."  I mean, yeah,
he's surely a player of some kind...  but is he "running it?"  By what
right?  Through what clear and legitimized set of accountabilities and
responsibilities?  There aren't any.   He's obviously winging it
totally.  They guy's not a conventional political or economic actor at
all. The guy's basically a conspirator.

 This Russian Mogul isn't the time-honored Duke of Aluminum, he's just
a hustler who blundered into de-facto control of a hastily privatized
industrial sector.  Would a Russian Joe Sixpack or a Russian Jane
Winecooler behave any differently in this mogul's shoes?  Probably not,
actually.  After about a week surviving this guy's parlous condition
they'd be behaving exactly like he does.

   Labor unions used to exist as a counterforce to this kind of
robber-baron phenomenon, but current wealth-generation techniques don't
actually need a lot of mass labor.  There's never been a big popular
strike against Gates and Soros and Perot and Bloomberg and bin Laden. 
The very idea sounds weird.

Most normal people never meet the modern ultrawealthy, because they
are shy gated-community creatures who are very scared of stalkers and
harassers.  The ones I've met don't certainly come across like
silk-hatted Wall Street exploiters of the masses.   They're blandly
indifferent to the masses; they don't have any practical need for the
masses.   Basically, they're business geeks.  They're  workaholic and
slightly monomaniacal characters who spend most of their time reading
financial briefing papers and practicing "due diligence."   

They're not a gilded elite splashing champagne around like Donald
Trump -- the Donald is a cornball blingbling TV showman, he's like a
poor guy's comic-book version of a rich guy.   Everyday modern
super-rich guys tend to be glum and somewhat cheerless Type A
overachievers, very dedicated and focussed.  They're kind of a drag to
be around, frankly.   

Let's suppose that Joe and Jolene get fully briefed on this issue,
successfully frame it as "unfairness", and decide to take political
steps to reform it.  What are they supposed to do in the way of
wielding a small-d democratic counterforce?  What's the victory
condition?  

I think there is one.  It's doable.  It would look more or less like a
Swedish economic model.   The Swedes are well-informed citizens.  They
vote.  They spend reasonable amounts of money on political campaigns. 
 They have an overwhelmingly  large middle class.  They have a highly
confiscatory tax system that keeps the tall poppies from overshadowing
the field.  The Swedes have high literacy rates, honest politics,
public transport, low infant mortality, relatively clean cities...  The
Swedes oughta be the avant-garde of mankind, I guess.  We should all
want to be Swedish.

But everybody else just kinda stares at them and shrugs.  
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #8 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 31 Dec 06 07:23

    
The U.S. could get there, but our traditions work against us. We buy
into economic inequality as something other than injustice because most
of us are middle class, and many in the middle class believe that they
could be ultrarich, given the right set of conditions  If Bill Gates
can be the richest guy in the world, there's hope for the rest of us.
And the unions have less of an effect because they don't really seem
dedicated to getting a fair shake for labor, their goal is
self-perpetuation.

What have we got to complain about? Even the poor in the USA seem rich
by world standards. 

And for the undernourished poorest of the world's poor, the Swedish
model or the way we live in the USA seem distant and unattainable.
They're still hanging out at the bottom of Maslow's pyramid, wondering
how to take that next step up - to safety.

I hang out online with people who spend most of their time jetting
from conference to conference talking about emerging revolutionary
web-based technologies and the convergent future of media. It struck me
recently that, if they committed to a few less conferences per year
and sent those unspent funds to Ethiopia and Darfur, we might at least
nudge those distant folks a little toward that next step on the
pyramid... and we might reduce our ecological footprint just slightly. 

People who can't bring themselves to stop driving SUVs or riding jets
around the planet can assuage their guilt somewhat by offsetting;
that's a new middle-man industry in the making, just pay into the wind
infrastructure or cover the cost of planting a few trees, and you can
pretend you're reducing your footprint.  I'm not sure I buy it.

You're headquartered in Serbia, but you told me last time we met that
you're actually living out of a suitcase, traveling here and there in
the world. How do you feel about your own ecological footprint? Are you
offsetting? And what's your typical gig, is it mostly public speaking?
Are you considering more teaching gigs like the one at Art Center?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #9 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 1 Jan 07 03:51

    
I do feel pretty keenly bad about my carbon emissions, but no, I don't
write checks to newfangled outfits that offset.  I'm an oil company
kid from Texas.  I'm completely and thoroughly and utterly implicated
there: oil fed me in the cradle, oil bought my shoes, oil sent me to an
oil-funded Texas college, oil flew me around the world several times
before the age of 18...  If I somehow managed to truly "offset my
emissions," I'd likely cease to exist.

Climate change is not gonna be combatted through voluntary acts of
individual charity.  It's gonna be combatted through some kind of
colossal, global-scaled, multilateral, hectic, catch-as-catch-can
effort to stop burning stuff, suck the burnt smoke out of the sky, and
put the smoke back into the ground.  That's not gonna get done a little
green teacup  at a time, because we've been doing it for two centuries
and we don't have two centuries to undo it.  

"Reducing emissions" is a wrongheaded way to approach it.  If
"reducing emissions" is the goal, then the best technique available is
to drop dead.  The second-best technique is to go around killing a lot
of people.   Nobody's got a lighter eco-footprint than a dead and
buried guy.  He's not walking around leaving footprints: the Earth is
piled on top of him.  

We're past the point where reduction helps much; we will have to
invent and deploy active means of remediation of the damage. But from
another, deeper perspective:  we shouldn't involve outselves in lines
of development where the ultimate victory condition is emulating dead
people.  There's no appeal in that. It's bad for us.   That kind of
inherent mournfulness is just not a good way to be human.  We're not
footprint-generating organisms whose presence on the planet is
inherently toxic and hurtful.  We need better handprints, not lighter
footprints.  We need better stuff, not less stuff.  We need to think it
through and take effective action, not curl up in a corner stricken
with guilt and breathe shallowly.

That said:  I do kinda live out of a suitcase these days.  I have
remarkably few physical possessions: no car, for instance... and I
don't seem to feel much need of such things.  I used to have all kinds
of writerly hardware: a printer, monitor, fax, landline phone, record
player, VCR, stacks of vinyl, stacks of CDs, tons of books, multitons
of magazines, newspapers piling up...  That's not entirely gone, but
it's cut back by a factor of ten.  It's all digitized and in the
laptop, basically.  Or it's on the Net.  

   I've got a genuine paperless office now.  I'm more productive with
less material.  That doesn't feel much like green frugality or
"voluntary simplicity," it just feels like a different kind of life. 
Which it is.  It's life in another century.

I do travel a whole lot.  I've got a gypsy streak and a magpie
temperament, I get restless.   Sometimes it pays to travel, quite often
it doesn't.  I don't really have a "typical" gig.  People ask me to go
someplace and contribute something-or-other, and I look at the
calendar and I generally go.

Although I was teaching at Art Center, it wasn't a faculty position;
it was a residency.  I learned a lot more there than  I managed to
teach.  It was very edifying to spend a year in design school; I look
at the world differently now, I think differently about  it.  I'd do
the like again; when you're a middle-aged guy, you have to engineer
some events that will break up your big, fat-headed, know-it-all
preconceptions.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #10 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 1 Jan 07 13:10

    
Can you expand on that last paragraph? More specifics about how you
see the world differently and think differently? And more about
breaking up know-it-all preconceptions? (I could probably use some
advice there, myself.)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #11 of 104: Bruce Umbaugh (bumbaugh) Tue 2 Jan 07 04:01

    <scribbled by bumbaugh Tue 2 Jan 07 07:23>
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #12 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 07 04:13

    
Well, the fastest way to break up know-it-all preconceptions is
to get outside of the stuffy confines of your own head and engage with
the grain of the material.  Travel will do that in a hurry:
meeting other people, other cultures. And building stuff will do that,
too. 
A two-by-four doesn't care how glib you are.

I was talking with Adam Greenfield about this recently.  He's
the author of the design-theory book EVERYWARE, while I wrote
a somewhat similar design-theory book called SHAPING THINGS,
and we were in a design school in Oslo doing some high-flown
pitches about ubiquitous computing... but design students,
instead of just circling catch-phrases and tucking them into
a notebook, will try to *prototype* something... They try to invent
and describe some coherent scheme that might actually *work
for end users.* 

As Adam put it: you talk to them and they actually *get up and do
something.*
And we both find that very gratifying.

I'm still very far from a hands-on mechanic, but after going
to design school, I'm a lot more willing to pull out the
multitool and void the warranty than I used to be.  A couple
of days ago the DVD player went on the fritz.  It's
a cheap piece of Korean junk, so I unscrewed the shell,
unjammed the stuck DVD and plugged it back in.  Now
it's sitting there playing  DVDs *naked,* with its high-speed Victrola
arm exposed and a bunch of bit-eating caterpillars... I should
reassemble it so it's sleek and pretty and cleanlined again,
but frankly, after design school I like that gizmo *better* naked,
the naked truth is more authentic.

My office chair broke last month.  I stared at it in natural
dismay for a minute, then I thought:  oh come on, you've
taught design, you  know all kinds of guys who've
designed and built chairs, you can't just stand here
gawking like some kind of rube, where is your sense
of shame...  so I disemboweled the chair and stuck it back together
with shoe glue.  It works.  I mean, it's sure not as awesomely
elegant as this Ross Lovegrove SuperNature chair I'm looking
at, which is really a poetic anthem to 21st century
Italian manufacturing processes, but when it comes to chairs,
I understand that game now.  I've become a design critic;  I'm never
be an athlete on the design gridiron, but I'm something like a sports
commentator.

I used to feel a certain sci-fi "sense of wonder" about design;
design doesn't lack for flashy theatrical histrionics -- but
what I've really come to treasure about it is that sense of
*engagement.*  Design isn't science and it isn't fiction,
but it's is a way of knowledge and a method of action;
it's a path into the poetry of things. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #13 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 2 Jan 07 06:53

    
You started a green design movement, Viridian Design
(http://viridiandesign.org), in 2000. As someone who's been along for
the right, I have a sense of its impact, and I would say that it's been
extremely, if often indirectly effective at elevating a cultural
perception and consciounsess of climate science and new thinking that
blends environmentalism with futurism and focuses on solutions,
leveraging the designers' penchant for "getting up and doing
something."

What's your own assessment of the Viridian Design Movement? Do you
agree that it's been successful? Is there more you'd like to do with
it? 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #14 of 104: Berliner (captward) Tue 2 Jan 07 08:19

    
And while you're chewing on that, I've got something. I, too, live in
Europe, in one of those more successful than not societies, but the
general perception of Sweden -- which, I agree, is a success story in
so many ways -- is that, well, yeah, they've got it together, man, but
they're...dull. *Irremediably* dull. And this perception is not only in
the U.S., but in Germany, too, which is dull enough itself. 

How do you do good and stay sexy? Because that issue has to be dealt
with if you want people to head down a good path. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #15 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 2 Jan 07 11:47

    
"And while you're chewing on that, I've got something. I, too, live in
Europe, in one of those more successful than not societies, but the
general perception of Sweden -- which, I agree, is a success story in
so many ways -- is that, well, yeah, they've got it together, man, but
they're...dull. *Irremediably* dull. And this perception is not only
in the U.S., but in Germany, too, which is dull enough itself." 

"How do you do good and stay sexy? Because that issue has to be dealt
with if you want people to head down a good path." 

*You want to do good and also be sexy?  Be 23 years old. Fifty years
from now, it's gonna take a lot of very dedicated social, political and
economic engineering to be a society with any decent number of 23 year
olds.  But those are going to be the sex-appeal societies in 2057 AD. 
The unsexy societies are gonna be the ones where people were too busy
clipping stock-option coupons to bother to have kids.  

*I know that sounds very weird and counterintuitive by the standards
of the "Population Bomb" era circa 1968, but 1968 was almost 40 years
ago.   Wherever there is prosperity and cheap contraception, the
population crashes -- it doesn't merely gently decline a bit, it
CRASHES, to way below replacement level.  You really want Germany to
become less dull? Have more German kids, give them money, guns, and
lawyers, and get out of their way.  They'll be more than just mildly
entertaining: you won't even know what they're talking about.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #16 of 104: Berliner (captward) Tue 2 Jan 07 12:40

    
Great answer, but I may not have phrased the question right. My
question was, how do you sell people a "Swedish" kind of society, that
being defined as one which, as you outlined above, does a lot of things
right in terms of keeping runaway wealth down, being environmentally
sound(ish), and so on. Like I said, the Swedes themselves are perceived
as dull, but the -- let's not capitalize it, for clarity -- swedish
ideal seems pretty good. By "sexy" I meant desirable, attractive. 

Me, I don't care if Germany becomes less dull; I'm more thinking of an
eventual swedenization of America in this case.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #17 of 104: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 2 Jan 07 14:17

    

I know that Sweden was more popular in the 60s, and "sexy" in a sleek blonde
and proto-IKEA sense, so i wonder at the perception of dullness.

Is there an economic factor?  Sweden's economy is not as strong as it once
was as I recall, so perhaps that's what you perceive. 

The US is likely to decline in relative wealth over the coming decades,
so a "less is more" trendiness may have to take hold for the landing to
be softened.  Just my ignorant hunch.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #18 of 104: Public persona (jmcarlin) Tue 2 Jan 07 15:20

    

> we shouldn't involve outselves in lines
> of development where the ultimate victory condition is emulating dead
> people. 

I just wanted to see that sentence again. It made the point with great
humor.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #19 of 104: Benjamin Kaplin (benkaplin) Wed 3 Jan 07 03:01

    
Bruce and Jon,

How do you see drugwar policies changing in America and abroad over
the next year or so? How does the rise of sophisticated black networks
and their integration with militant extremist groups that John Robb's
described change the dynamics of the decades-old "war" America's waging
on drugs?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #20 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 07 05:44

    
I don't think it's entirely possible to turn America Swedish, any more
than it was possible to turn America into the Confederate States of
America during the past 6 years of earnest effort.  I'd be guessing,
though, that if there's a social change in a "Swedish" direction, it
would likely start in a region, like a model city, and then percolate
outward.  In other words, win people over through some functional
real-world examples rather than spinning them a new political framework
and haranguing them about how incorrect they are.

Living in Eastern Europe, I get a close-up look at the impact of
European power.  Some of it is political, the not particularly
effectual part, and the rest of it is infrastructural and economic,
stuff like banks, airports, retail chains, highways, power supplies,
sewers.  The power of the European regulatory and commercial structure
is awesome: it comes on fast, and it comes high low and middle in a
vast imperial wave.  It's "soft" power, but it really is imperial
power, and it doesn't brook dissent any more than a rising tide does.

What's happening to places like Poland and Bulgaria now is pretty much
the exact polar opposite of what's happening to Iraq. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #21 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 3 Jan 07 07:40

    
People talk about "the government" as though it was some kind of
monolithic entity, but it's not. It's a framework that exists because
people agree it should exist to manage the commons, however that's
defined. I think the so-called neoconservatives have learned that your
can use government to your own ends only as long as you have "the
consent of the governed," in a complex democracy like the U.S. If you
persistently misuse power, your hold on the people will unravel and
you'll find yourself losing, perhaps ultimately locked out by the
people, their representatives, and the system of checks and balances.

Brute force dictatorships like Saddam Hussein's survive in part
because people fear the alternative of the kind of chaos we see in Iraq
now, which is both  horrifying and fascinating, the latter because it
shows us what we have when the center doesn't hold. You saw similar
chaos in the former Soviet republics after the fall, no? How have those
evolved? Are there lessons for Iraq?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #22 of 104: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Wed 3 Jan 07 07:50

    

(Those of you following along at home, at work, at school, in your favorite
Internet cafe, using a neighbor's Wi-Fi, or whatever, but not (yet) members
of the Well: send your questions or quips to the hosts at inkwell@well.com
for us to post on your behalf.)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #23 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 3 Jan 07 08:49

    
Iraq's a petrocracy.  With the signal exception of Norway, practically
every nation or smashed-nation that has oil is in turmoil, running
scared, rattling sabers, or just plain catching it in the neck. 
There's a global war for oil, but we're not getting more oil by using
bayonets; we're getting less.

I don't think the chaos in Iraq is some kind of scary null-state that
arrives when the petrocrat is chased out of his palace.  Fanatical
young men are sacrificing their lives every day to create that chaos. 
That level of chaos is damn hard work.  The chaos is there because
important political and social actors are engineering it.  They can't
defeat the US Army hand-to-hand, but they can certainly defeat US
policy.

I don't think it was popular indignation at his policies that drove
Bush into this corner.  If gas was a buck-fifty and there was a calm
puppet government in Baghdad, everyone would think W. was Teddy
Roosevelt.  The guy is losing a war he didn't have to start and is
blowing out the bank.  That's what really scares his former backers,
not the one-party state, the imperial signing statements, the loss of
civil liberties, spying, torture, and all the rest of it.  People watch
the guy make power-grab after power-grab, then he either does nothing
or he blows it.  The more you hand over to him, the more he screws up. 
He's delusionary.

Putin is doing all the anti-democratic things that Bush is doing and
then some, but Putin is hugely popular, seventy percent ratings.  The 
Russians enjoy watching him work.  They think he's the Man, he's
poisoning traitors and turning off gas taps to entire countries...  If
Bush could have satisfied the angry and vengeful Red States with some
similar competent acrobatics, we'd be looking at Republican dominance
as far as the eye can see.

I'm phrasing this in a rather raw and confrontational way here, but
this guy is a lot rawer:
http://www.exile.ru/2006-December-29/the_year_russia_schooled_the_west.html

There's a lot of street-punk mordant irony there, but that's pretty
much the story.   He's telling the truth.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #24 of 104: Jamais Cascio, OpenTheFuture.com (cascio) Wed 3 Jan 07 10:35

    
Hi Bruce

That link reminds me to ask what you regularly read to keep up with the
zeitgeist. I'd imagine that you get a lot of people sending you interesting
links, link a human DEW line, but you've got to follow things on your own.
What's in your list of must-reads?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #25 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 3 Jan 07 13:27

    
Contrariness on my part:

"That's what really scares his former backers, not the one-party
state, the imperial signing statements, the loss of civil liberties,
spying, torture, and all the rest of it."

That may be true of the neoconservative wonks whose corporate
fantasies about the world inspired Bush's disastrous foreign (and
domestic) policies, but I can't believe that ordinary Republicans who
bought the party line aren't horrified by every item in your list, and
a few more you didn't mention (e.g. substantial increases in national
debt, devolution of the U.S. educational system, loss of global
business/tech competitive edge, etc.) 

"Putin is doing all the anti-democratic things that Bush is doing and
then some, but Putin is hugely popular, seventy percent ratings." 

But that's a different context, no? And given the insecurity of
post-Soviet Russia, doesn't it make sense for them to embrace a former
KGB strongman who seems to be having some success building an economy?

***
I'm with Jamais: d'you have a public list of bookmarks anywhere?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #26 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 07 03:43

    
*No, I don't have a public list of bookmarks, if you don't
count my WIRED blog.
http://blog.wired.com/sterling/

*I used to have "sources."  I can't say I do that much any more. 
These days it seems to be mostly about Sphere, Technorati, Feedster,
Digg, Reddit and Google.  I've joined the people and machines who are
boiling it all down to an insidious algorithmic flow of liquid chunks
of deep-linked micromedia.

And even below that, it's tags.  I use search engines to look
methodically for words.  Neologisms, commonly.  I learn a lot from
using machines to track jargon.  

I used to be fanatically devoted to paper books and magazines.  
Nowadays I splash around in formless electronic pools of web semantics.
 I don't even "research" any more -- I can research stuff in seconds
flat.  Instead, I spend a lot of my time doing the work that editors
and publishers used to do: trying to invest the slushpile with some
credibility.  "I found this stuff pronto: but is it all a pack of
lies?"

That's where it helps to have friends: but even if you've got 'em, on
the Net they tend to agglomerate into echo-chambers and whispering
campaigns.  The Internet is really coming into its own now, and it's
scary how intrinsically different it is from previous forms of media. 
The deeper you dig into what it's really good at, the more alien it
becomes.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #27 of 104: Ludo, Ergo Sum (robertflink) Thu 4 Jan 07 05:22

    
>the Donald is a cornball blingbling TV showman, he's like a
poor guy's comic-book version of a rich guy.<

I think I detect some material in the statement that may capture the
state of the USA if not the world at the present time.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #28 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 07 06:45

    
Alex Steffen wants to know how your fiction's coming along, and what
challenges the pace of current events presents to writing SF novels
these days?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #29 of 104: Michael Heap (bumbaugh) Thu 4 Jan 07 08:23

    
Michael Heap writes, from off-Well:


Hi Bruce
Â 
>Iraq's a petrocracy.Â  With the signal exception of Norway, practically
>every nation or smashed-nation that has oil is in turmoil, running
>scared, rattling sabers, or just plain catching it in the neck.
>There's a global war for oil, but we're not getting more oil by using
>bayonets; we're getting less.
I feel there i some truth in this however lacking in other areas, having
recently relocated to the gulf (Qatar) for my job (Al jazeera),
its interesting to see how gulf countries are responding to cultural change
& Eco issues,

there is certain sense of cultural hangover here with many countries (esp in
Qatar: those distinguished by benevolent oligarchical regimes) having
traveled from camels and tents to land cruisers and palaces, (incidentally:
 petrol running at 19cents a litre here) in half a century essentially
having shifted from a Bedouin state to aÂ late 20th-century gas fueled
Oligarchy, someÂ in turn are mutating into middle-eastern (petro-gas
fuled)Â las Vegas themed holiday destinations (as is evidenced by Dubai and
the UAE), or liberal Wahhabist business & media centers (Doha), as opposed
to theÂ fundamentalist states Iran & Saudi (often unwilling to change) in
this region which are the ones that are suffering from both politial issues,
and a disenfranchised youth that can no longer live the lifestyles of their
parents (ones that petrofunded the arabicbaby boom that has since gone
south) thees youth are the ones looking for a change, sometimesÂ looking to
live the lifestyle that they can no longer afford,Â some ofÂ them looking
toward al qaeda andÂ  radical groups, sometimes lookingÂ to lash outÂ
against the 'supposed' bourgeois west and the lifestyle that it promotes
(incidentally an idea promoted by many of the fundamentalist states re-
enforced by the media out here who dualistically promote the fall of the
west and the bourgeois western lifestyle oft presented byÂ US & European TV
Series)
Â
these are theÂ nations that have at least one generation that is petrofunded
and have known no different, the outcome of the youth growing into current
circumstances is not fixed, and is largely driven by government, extremist
rhetoric & media that they are exposed to.
Â
also as you say previously a green teacup at a time isnt going to solve the
situation, as is certainly evidenced here (god only knows what its like in
china and indias growing economys) rampant commercialism run wild leads to
excessive consumerism & consumption with 1in2 vehicles on the road are
4litre 4x4s with noone even thinking of global environmental circumstances,
(as a example im a Â lifelong recycler, i was shocked when i arrived here
and asked about recycling - i was met with bemused stares- as if i was some
kind of crank, the idea simplyÂ hasnt crossed peoples minds) all food flown
in from abroad, double and triple shrink rapped &Â bagged, every room air
conditioned (i have 7 huge A/C units in my house)Â yet the housing isnt
insulated from the 50+degree heat.
Â 
with this in mind what is your opinion on the current euro green taxes on
emissions, global taxes on carbon emissions, current British subsidies and
promotion of 'green' electricity generation: isn't this all just pissing in
the wind with the rest of the 2nd world currently consuming more and more
gas/petrol/plastics, or is it just a cynical ploy of the political class to
extract more tax revenue from an increasingly more green aware burgeoning
European middle class>?


Michael Heap

--
My Blog : http://mandesert.blogspot.com/
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #30 of 104: Woody Evans (bumbaugh) Thu 4 Jan 07 08:24

    
Woody Evans, also NOTW, asks:




Bruce,

Is Second Life a nation?  If not, what is it?  If so, what system of
government does it have, and in what direction do you think its
governance will develop?

Thanks,
Woody Evans
http://www.woodyevans.com/blog/index.php
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #31 of 104: Mike Godwin (mnemonic) Thu 4 Jan 07 09:51

    

Bruce writes:

"I've got a genuine paperless office now."

What? No books?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #32 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 07 09:53

    
*Thanks for writing in, Michael Heap.  That was interesting.  I used
to have Texan relatives out in the Gulf.  Digging up all that oil the
rest of us are burning now.

*When it comes to inherently global problems like global warming, it's
comical to watch regional players fingerpointing at everybody else. 
What, like this tiny chip called Dubai caused the North Pole to melt? 
The amount of stuff we've already spewed scarcely compares to the
amount of stuff we're likely to spew.  Everybody lives in a glass
greenhouse on this issue.  The only ones even close to a right to
fingerpoint are the Danes and maybe the Swedes.

The Arabs would stop burning oil in a hurry if the Iranians were kind
enough to nuke the straits of Hormuz.  "Oh look!  The Arabs got all
green!  They stopped shipping oil completely!"  Would we be thrilled
with the Arabs all of a sudden?  Would we be backpatting them for
sparing the world emissions by refusing to sell us any?  I don't think
so.

Suppose we didn't have a smokestack problem.  Suppose we had a sewage
problem, instead.  Suppose we were wading around knee-deep in raw
sewage.  Would we then argue: "Oh wow, the Second World is making more
sewage than us.  Their sewage rates are growing faster than our sewage
rates"?    What's the upshot of this kind of beggar-your-neighbor
argumentation? 

    If the seas rise, Dubai is sunk.  Dubai is on the coast.  Check
out these dikes they had built. It won't be fun to be a rich Arab in a
climate crisis.  It's no fun to be a rich Arab right now.

http://www.royalhaskoning.com/Royal_Haskoning/Corporate/en-GB/News/artificialr
eefdutchcoast.htm
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #33 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 07 09:55

    
Bruce writes:

"I've got a genuine paperless office now."

What? No books?

*Not zero, but fewer.  About two orders of magnitude fewer.
It's scary how little paper I read these days.  It really
is all about screens.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #34 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 4 Jan 07 10:07

    

"Is Second Life a nation?  If not, what is it?  If so, what system of
government does it have, and in what direction do you think its
governance will develop?"

*Me and practically every tech commentator who ever heard of 2L thinks
that Second Life is awesome copy.  It's today's Web 2.0 and tomorrow's
3-D Web in one wacky technolibertarian community.  Except for Clay
Shirky, that is.  Clay thinks that Second Life is some kinda massively
overhyped real-estate bubble that will go the way of  virtual reality
helmets.

http://many.corante.com/archives/2006/12/12/second_life_what_are_the_real_numb
ers.php

Hey, what's Clay Shirky's opinion against that of a thousand other
guys?  Well, unfortunately, Clay Shirky is about five hundred times
smarter than most other guys, so the odds against his being right are
only two to one.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #35 of 104: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Thu 4 Jan 07 10:30

    
So what's on your radar these days that most of us probably haven't caught
onto yet?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #36 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 07 10:51

    
Hmm... I could imagine a reality where Clay's right, and so's
everybody else.

Second Life, World of Warcraft, and various other visual environments
and MMORPGs have relatively high barriers to entry while the rest of
the web is mainstreaming. Your average MySpace denizen won't
necessarily have the chops, the technology, or the *patience* to make
much of an entry into Second Life, so those who go there get that
exclusive temporary autonomous zone vibe that was part of the mojo of
the early Internet, before everybody and his grandmother could connect
with what we like to call "broadband" and wander into pretty much any
web-based community, looking for a virtual bridge game.  Linden Labs
will eventually find a way to make Second Life fast and easy, and fill
the place with everyone from libidinous teens to slightly hip
grandmothers. Either that, or it'll be unsupportable and unravel,
leaving virtual land speculators byteless and broke.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #37 of 104: Christian Crumlish (xian) Thu 4 Jan 07 11:58

    
Clay is great at cutting against the grain. He has excellent instincts
for deflating pomposity and popping hype bubbles. I'm definitely
skeptical about Second Life but one thing I've noticed is that people
really want to talk about. 

If I mention that I've dabbled there or that the Information
Architecture Institute is exploring setting up a presence there, people
from all walks of life at holiday parties these last few weeks had
thousands of questions about it (not all about virtual sex) and really
found the topic intriguing.

This may simply be a mirror of the journalists' realization that it
makes good copy or the self-similarity involved in hypey companies
setting up hypey initiates in SL with hypey PR announcements done
there, but I still find it interesting how much people find it
interesting.

Also, I suspect that long after the SL bubble has popped (some) people
will still be engaged in immersive virtual environments, whether with
helmets or mouse pointers or Wii-like gestures or whatever.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #38 of 104: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Thu 4 Jan 07 12:38

    
I think one issue with SL is that it's really two very different
experiences, depending upon your interests. For some people -- in
particular, the people who get the most media attention and generate the
greatest pundit interest -- SL is Lego on digital steroids, a way to quite
literally build yourself a new world. That's very cool, very interesting,
and very much not the majority activity on SL. 

The majority activity (from everything I've experienced and read about it)
is chat, often sex chat, sometimes with some dress-up thrown into the mix.
That's what most of the people who read an article about SL and check it
out run into (again, IME). Clearly the combo of chat & Lego is interesting 
enough for a few thousand regulars (up to over 5K concurrently, from a 
recent report), but it's not yet enough to topple WoW, let alone TV.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #39 of 104: Damon Lippert posted by (bumbaugh) Thu 4 Jan 07 13:07

    
Damon writes us:

Bruce and Jon,

      More and more climate change realists are steering the
conversation away from "preventing" climate change  into ideas on how
to live with the changes.

How does this change bode for the future dialogue on climate change?

Does this change focus the argument more on "We have to take care of
this now! Bust out the $$$!" or " Oh, Well. This confirms we should
just continue the practices that makes us short term money now."

Does the fatalism inherent in mitigation technologies lead to the
self-fulfilling prophecy of climate change?

Damon Lippert
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #40 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 07 13:37

    <scribbled by jonl Thu 4 Jan 07 21:09>
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #41 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 4 Jan 07 21:11

    
Second Life is a novel environment, creative and whacky - you can
*fly* while you're there. The fascination is understandable, no? To
some it smells like money, to others it smells like revolution.

Bruce, Damon's question is a good one: is mitigation a solution or a
retreat?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #42 of 104: Sofia's Choice (amicus) Thu 4 Jan 07 22:00

    

Only a couple of tangential references to Iran... what do you think will
happen there, and what could have happened, had our Cowboy in Chief hadn't
jabbed that hot Evil Axis brand into their backsides?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #43 of 104: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Thu 4 Jan 07 22:04

    
(Rumor that Khameini has died hitting the net, btw.)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #44 of 104: Howard Berkey (howard) Thu 4 Jan 07 22:07

    
Whoa.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #45 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 07 03:11

    
#35 of 44: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Thu 04 Jan 2007 (10:30 AM)

So what's on your radar these days that most of us probably haven't
caught onto yet?

*You mean, what do I know that JAMAIS CASCIO doesn't already know? 
Man, that's a good question.  I reckon I know a lot of exotic stuff
about Serbian restaurant menus.

*I guess the number-one premonition on my radar these days is serious
trouble in the RFID biz.  These RFID guys were kind of the polar
opposite of Second Life; there was scarcely any gleeful popular hype
about their technology, and they were expecting to make a ton of money 
from the business world right off the bat.  They got the imperial
heavy-hitters at the top of the supply-chain, Wal-Mart, Defense
Department, et al, to gather in a smoke-filled room and issue mandates
to tag most everything with radio-frequency identity chips.  That was
three years ago.

There was a lot of fear uncertainty and doubt in the civil lib crowd
about this project, because it's such an obvious and blatant invasion
of privacy.  Nobody seemed to forecast that the market itself would
turn so mulish.  Sticking tiny computer chips onto everything costs a
lot of money.  And though that grand scheme would definitely pay for
Wal-Mart, it isn't paying for the people who are actually doing the
sticking.  They're not in open rebellion, but they're passively
non-cooperating.  It's sorta like: suppose we installed Total
Information Awareness and nobody plugged in the cameras.  

Nobody wants to pay out of their own pockets to make Wal-Mart into the
Microsoft of the planet's supply chain.

Two years of loss-leading in business and you can kind of skate over
the problem, but three years and no money to speak of, and you're
starting to look kinda weird.  This year the industry's boosters are
doing a lot of smoke-and-mirrors hyping of lab-stuff that barely
exists: RFID in Australian cattle, RFID in American passports, RFID in
toll-booths, RFID in cellphones.  That's a pretty far cry from a
ubiquitous computing app that would enable tomorrow's Internet of
Things.  

Kind of a pity, because I wrote a really nifty book about that
prospect.  It wouldn't be the first beautiful design-theory slain by an
ugly fact-on-the-ground.

There is the possibility now that Wal-Mart's CompuServe model is
buckling, the RFID biz may be replaced by something more like an
emergent, bottom-up Internet model.  But I don't see how the people who
started that first scheme can possibly by the ones to start the other.
 It's just not in their nature: it's like expecting the phone company
to sponsor spam, porn and Wikipedia.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #46 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 07 03:33

    
Alex Steffen wants to know how your fiction's coming along, and what
challenges the pace of current events presents to writing SF novels
these days?

*Well, I'm writing some.  I got a piece out in the January 2007
MAGAZINE OF FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION that's one of the best science
fiction stories I ever wrote.

*The pace of current events doesn't scare me much, at least, not from
a sci-fi perspective.  The *direction* of current events is horrifying,
but it's not like it's hard to outguess.  People have been forecasting
climate change for 50 years.  That's not going away.  Fundamentalists
have been invading secular politics for 50 years.  That's not going
away.  The Internet is 45, maybe 50 years old, depending on how you
count it.  It's not going away.  Unless you count some kind of ghastly
climate tipping-point, we don't have any Singularities at hand.  Not
even close.

The worst part about writing science fiction is the publishing and
distribution system.  Practically everything we know about literature
and popular literate culture is predicated on the use of ink on paper. 
I was a big fan of that stuff, but if you find a kid under 20 today
who's exclusively into ink on paper, he's some kind of weird
antiquarian.  

Every Warcraft addict and Second Life lego-fanatic is somebody who
gafiated from science fiction fandom and into social practices a lot
more 21C.  There is a major fire in the basement there; it's like the
death of the pulp magazines, only much, much more so.

So I can write science fiction, and even get it in print, but I no
longer quite know who the readers are,  why they're reading that, and
why they're not doing something else.  Lord knows *I'm* doing something
else.  If they're my readers, why aren't they doing what I'm doing:
websurfing their heads off?  What can I tell them with novels that they
don't already know?  

I got a novel underway right now that's got some serious novelty in
it, but man this book has been hard to write.  It's a novel about life
in the future, and nobody would dream of reading a novel in this
extrapolated culture.  Sixty thousand linear words in a row?  No
graphics?  No hotlinks?  And I turn the pages?  You're joking.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #47 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 5 Jan 07 03:53

    
Damon writes us:

Bruce and Jon,

      More and more climate change realists are steering the
conversation away from "preventing" climate change  into ideas on how
to live with the changes.

How does this change bode for the future dialogue on climate change?

Does the fatalism inherent in mitigation technologies lead to the
self-fulfilling prophecy of climate change?


*This one's dead obvious.  There isn't any "prophecy" or "prevention"
involved any more.  A climate crisis is here now.  Realism says that
it's here now and it's getting worse fast.  There isn't any way to get
along with that prospect and think it's groovy.  It's a 50 year old
issue; today it's a big issue; 20 years from now, it's THE issue.  

*It's not about prevention, mitigation or adjustment.   The first
already failed and the second two are not possible.  So it's about
remediation.  Repairing the damage.   An atmosphere upgrade.  Obviously
we have to stop intensifying the damage, but if we further expect to
avoid collapse, we have to undo the damage already done.  

This isn't a modish thing to think and say in 2007, it sounds kinda
grim, farfetched and scary.  The modish things to think and say in 2007
are the kinda grim, farfetched and scary things that I was saying in
1998.

  If you go sample popular opinion in 2016, of course it's going to be
about cleaning up the sky.  The only variable there is whether people
will be also be cleaning up heaps of bodies in the wrecks of major
cities as they're doing that.  The variable depends entirely on how
quickly we knock it off with the delusionary crap and just get after
the job at hand.  
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #48 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 5 Jan 07 04:50

    
That raises the question Jamais talked about at Worldchanging some
time ago: in reparing the damage via geoengineering, what geoethical
principles will we adopt and follow? 
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/003189.html)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #49 of 104: Christian Crumlish (xian) Fri 5 Jan 07 09:53

    
Got a bit of a curveball for you, Bruce. Have you read "Mycelium
Running" or anything else by Paul Stamets? If so, any thoughts on his
idea that mycelia constitute "nature's internet" and a possibly
sentient neural net for Gaia? (I've just started reading the book and
was quite willing to write it off as hippie/psilocybist hooey but I
have to admit there are some pretty compelling ideas in thar.)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #50 of 104: Andrew Alden (alden) Fri 5 Jan 07 10:25

    
Soil bacteria were shown last year to connect themselves in networks of
electrically conductive filaments--nanowires. Google "pnas gorby" for
details: author Gorby published in PNAS on 10 July 2006.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #51 of 104: Christian Crumlish (xian) Fri 5 Jan 07 10:57

    
I thought of it because Stamets believes mycelium may be key to
healing the ecosystem.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #52 of 104: Peter Hart-Davis (bumbaugh) Fri 5 Jan 07 13:23

    
Peter writes to comment:


"Brute force dictatorships like Saddam Hussein's survive in part
because people fear the alternative of the kind of chaos we see in Iraq
now, which is both  horrifying and fascinating, the latter because it
shows us what we have when the center doesn't hold. You saw similar
chaos in the former Soviet republics after the fall, no? How have those
evolved? Are there lessons for Iraq?" ( Jon Lebkowsky   (jonl)   Wed 3
Jan 07 07:40)

Unfortunately in South Africa during the apartheid years the possibility
of impending chaos was often used to instill fear and as a threat
against those calling for apartheid's demise from within and without the
country.
This threat was built up so much that in 1994 many thousands of
predominantly white people left.  These were supposedly intelligent and
highly skilled people who were taken in by the propaganda.  While
hopefully South Africa is not the exception that proves the rule, I
believe that better lessons are and need to be learnt from South
Africa's example and at the same time South Africa should be given as
much support and encouragement in order to support that example.

Peter

PS: I hope this is not too late.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #53 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 07 02:15

    
Well, if a hallucinatory network of intelligent fungal filaments is in
charge of the planet's ecosystem, it needs to do a better damn job.

Y'know, as a science fiction writer, I dote on that kind of daft
deep-green whimsy, I'm kind of a connoisseur of it.  It's not much use
in case of trouble, though.  It's like going to a broken levee in New
Orleans and signalling the sky with bottle rockets because, you know,
the Space Brothers might help out.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #54 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 6 Jan 07 02:42

    
Jonl writes:

"That raises the question Jamais talked about at Worldchanging some
time ago: in reparing the damage via geoengineering, what geoethical
principles will we adopt and follow? "
(http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/003189.html)

*Well, given that the situation is going to be dire and getting direr,
I'd be guessing that the first ethical principle that springs to
humanity's mind will be "an eye for an eye."  It's not enough just to
fix the sky; if the planetary house is burning down, somebody's got to
be blamed for the calamity and purged.  

The obvious candidate for people of sense would be Exxon-Mobil and
their willing subordinates, the US State Department, but it could be
most anybody, really.  We could see some kind of determined Creationist
witch-hunt for gays because their sexual practices have warped the
weather.

The last and least likely outcome would be some Mylar-clad think-tank
of wise and fully-informed ethical theorists telling us how to
ethically practice planetary engineering.  If these guys had any clout
-- hell, if they even *existed* -- we'd have never gotten into this
mess in the first place.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #55 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 6 Jan 07 06:51

    
I went back to Jamais' post at Worldchanging, and I think it's
worthwhile to post the proposed core principles here:

<quote>
Interconnectedness is a recognition that the various planetary systems
have deep and sometimes subtle cross-dependencies. Changes directly
affecting a given system cannot be assumed to be neutral with regards
to other systems; changes to (say) surface reflectivity, such as in the
urban heat island effect, can in turn result in changes to rainfall
patterns, influence the level of atmospheric ozone and particulate
matter, and help determine the degree to which light from the Sun is
absorbed.

Diversity is an argument against monocultures arising directly from
and as an unintended consequence of human activity. Direct monocultures
include commercial forest stands; unintended monocultures include the
proliferation of aggressive invasive organisms (e.g., "weeds") after
environmental shifts open up new niches. Monocultures make ecosystems
less able to survive shocks.

Foresight is not a new concept at WorldChanging, even if expressed in
somewhat different language. Ecological and geophysical changes tend to
be slow, in human terms, and it's important when considering the
implications of proposed actions to think in terms of the planet's
pace, not just society's pace. An example would be the (as of now
uncommon) recognition that global warming involves slow but relentless
changes, such that quick shifts in human behavior will have no
noticeable immediate effect.

Integration is an explicit counter to the "die-off" line of thinking
that places the needs of human societies below all other systems on the
planet. Not only does the "die-off" argument result in ecological
disaster as desperate societies try to grab remaining resources, its
logic leads to the argument that (a) since human society is inherently
unsustainable, and (b) since the planet, given sufficient time, can
recover from any environmental burden we place on it before we die,
there's no reason to be cautious, and we should do as we like with no
concern for the future. Seeing human societies as part of the planet's
systems, and as worthy of preservation and protection as any other
part, allows for a longer-term perspective.

Expansion of Options encompasses "sustainability," but is a larger
concept. This means more than simply finding a sustainable balance of
use and preservation; expansion of options means actively seeking
behaviors that return more resources to the planet than they take, that
emphasize renewal and reuse, and that provide a growing, diverse basis
for future innovation.

Reversibility is an attempt to capture the idea that, where possible,
we should bias towards those choices that allow for reconsideration if
unanticipated and undesirable consequences arise. Reversibility will
not always be an option -- indeed, when matched with the Foresight
principle, we may not recognize a problem until well after the option
of reversal has passed. But when reversible options are available, they
should be given special consideration.

These principles and the statement of geoethics are obviously
works-in-progress, and need greater refinement, elaboration and vision.
I welcome and encourage suggestions and argument. 
<end quote>

There's a manifesto in there somewhere, something that would also
reveal the daunting complexity of climate change to those folks who
hear "global warming" and think it's about temperature alone. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #56 of 104: Gail Williams (gail) Sat 6 Jan 07 10:25

    

I saw a clip from a movie about Mass Extinctions at a local benefit for
channel 29 (cable access free speech tv in San Francisco.)  A group of
assorted experts talking about the projection of losing half the species of
life in a 30 to 50 year time span, given no changes in human culture and
behavior.

(Then they noted that was extinctions; that population colapse is
just as threatening -- say if the honeybee survives unimpared in Italy
but nowhere else, so it is not extinct, but the impact on the rest of the
world is still catastrophic.  Very sobering, and perhaps the opposite 
tone than what WorldChanging likes to take, but compelling enough that it
is really bothering me.  I guess i could pass this disturbing jolt of
unwated information along for all interested... the film is still 
in production, evidently, but arresting the trailer is up. 
http://www.treehugger.com/files/2006/07/call_of_life_fa.php )

But the thing I wanted to post about was forecasting, futurism and
speculative imagination.  

Bruce, I accidentally came across the rant you did at CFP in 1994 
(It's not long, and it's still up in the "text museum" at the WELL Gopher, 
here: http://www.well.com:70/0/Publications/authors/Sterling/cfp4 
and will be, since we like keeping that archive.)

Reading it I though a lot about what scared net advocates then and now.
Kudos for than as now looking past distractions like both kidporn and the
war on adults sharing adult content, at the "war on Terra" and 
bigger questions and threats to our continued human dreaming.

Are there things you've predicted with near certainty that just faded
away?  Do you play it safe with prognostication?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #57 of 104: Christian Crumlish (xian) Sat 6 Jan 07 12:53

    
I can't proxy Stamets' entire thesis but I think he's saying that the
mycelium filaments are overwhelmed by our effect on the biosphere but
that if we learn to cultivate them in various ways they can help clean
up and restore a lot of the toxic and otherwise fscked up stuff.

I don't have the science to judge any of this (and for that matter I'm
only a chapter or two into his book) - but he isn't just waving magic
pixie wand and saying we should clap for tinkerbell to heal the earth.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #58 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 7 Jan 07 02:18

    
Hey, if Tinker Bell could really pull that off, I'd be willing. I hear
Tinker Bell can repair pots and pans. That sounds laudably practical.

There are a number of serious-minded people who think that plankton
and/or various microbes could affect CO2 levels within a short time. 
That's an unusual way to think, but it isn't delusionary.  If somebody
started further claiming that plankton has a Gaian artificial
intelligence because they're all in the same planetary soup, then I
would balk somewhat.

I know it's impossible to "predict the future."  Given my personal
druthers, I prefer to fantasize about stuff.  Like, writing Kafka-like
parables where talking insects wisecrack to each other.  Mostly about
the exigencies of evolutionary biology and what a drag it is.

http://www.scifi.com/scifiction/originals/originals_archive/sterling2/

As a writer, I think I'm kind of on top of my game with a piece like
that; it is daft whimsy, because talking fireflies are not really far
at all from Disney and Tinker Bell; but it's creative and unusual, and
it has cult appeal; if you somehow like that sort of thing, that's
really the sort of thing you would like.

But that isn't enough.  Not near enough.  The exigencies of the time
require more from me than amusing myself with a little jeux d'esprit. 
Around 1998 I realized that people really *needed* somebody willing to
"predict the future."  Of course, that's not possible, but "without
vision, the people perish."  The need is severe.  People actually *pine
away* if they're told they have to get up in the morning and blindly
slog their way through just another day.  They need a bigger picture
than that, and if nothing is offered to them other than utter nonsense,
then they will hold their noses and bolt down the utter nonsense.

So, even though it's clearly impossible and intellectually fraudulent
in some strict sense, *somebody* ought to "predict the future."  I
mean, not just do demographic models and some dry corporate trend
forecasting, but actually wrap the future up in a big-picture  package
and sprinkle some Tinker Bell dust.  That job really needs doing.  
Otherwise, fundamentalists simply recruit everyone, strap bombs on them
and promise them pie in the sky.  They're doing a great job at that,
actually.  Al Qaeda's got visionary daring.  They do things that are
ethically contemptible, but the grandeur of their vision allows them to
put that over everybody else.  They are necromancers.  And they sure
know how to play that game.

The classic version of a science fiction writer pulling this stunt off
would be L. Ron Hubbard.  So, the track record isn't that great, and
it's clearly a treacherous and morally ambiguous line of work, but,
what the hell: I'll do it.  I'll volunteer.  I'm a strange guy.  I do a
lot of odd stuff.  You need some future predicted?  Absolutely, fine,
I'll predict some future for you.  I know all about that line of work. 
I don't want you to join my cult, empty your pockets into my bank
account, or blow yourself up for me, but I am a literal, no-kidding
"Visionary."  I can do that kind of stuff, for whatever it's worth.
People *like* me to do it, they're really grateful. Been doing it for
years.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #59 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 7 Jan 07 09:07

    
As you know, I spend a fair amount of time hanging out with our mutual
friend, professional futurist Derek Woodgate. I like his approach;
it's not about predicting, it's about *creating* the future. He
identifies various trends in his clients' field of interest, and he
helps them decide which ones they care about, what probable outcomes
serve them best, and how to favor those outcomes and make them happen.
Isn't that what you've done, to some extent, with the Viridian Design
Movement?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #60 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 07 02:40

    
Derek is a fun guy to hang out with.  He always
knows something new.

Still, I'm not quite in Derek's line of work, because I don't
have any clients.  In business-futurism, it's the client
who provides the grain of the material.  It's not about
the ENTIRE future, it's about the client's future and what
the client might possibly do about it.  In which case I think
Derek's approach is entirely sensible.  

Designers have clients, too.  When I talk to design classes
about futurism I urge them to get really close to the client.
They generally know how to get really close to the user,
so this is their natural path into that related line
of work.

"Visionaries" don't have any clients.  Visionaries have
audiences (assuming they can get anybody to listen).
The visionary business isn't even a business, it's one
of those vague, handwaving, semi-literary, cultural things.
Visionaries generally have some kind of compulsive
quality and a haunted look, they're not efficient
functionaries, they're frayed around the edges.

I sent out a Viridian Note today which is about Bob
Metcalfe, inventor of Ethernet, getting into the
clean energy business.  Bob's not a client of mine,
I don't work for him or vice versa, but I've been
moaning and howling for years on my little mailing list
that the Silicon Valley - Route 128 crowd needs to
tackle climate change.  Now that's actually happening,
so I guess I could jump up and down, oooh ooh ooh,
the futurist, he's so foresightful...  but I don't
feel that way about it.  It's not like I caused it.
To me, it was a blatantly obvious development that's
been taking forever to occur.  

Now that it's here, I'm already wondering about what comes next.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #61 of 104: Richard York (bumbaugh) Mon 8 Jan 07 07:21

    
Richard York writes:


Jon and Bruce:

Jon states, quite correctly, that post-feudal governments really do require
the consent of the governed and that the principal function of modern
government has been protect the commons.  I have come to believe that, as a
result of a long (40 year) series of unintended consequences, the commons
has been deeply eroded.

To some extent the old commons is being replaced by online communities and
other affinity groups.  But, there does not seem to be a whole lot of the
kind of cross pollination of ideas which occurred when people of differing
economic, cultural and social backgrounds were forced together in the draft
or in the ghettoes.

How does each of you identify the commons, particularly in the US?  Is it
still there and if not, how do we rebuild some 21st century version of it?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #62 of 104: Shebar Windstone (bumbaugh) Mon 8 Jan 07 07:22

    
Shebar Windstone e-mails us to say:


Not that courts are doing a very good job of adjudicating crimes committed
by corporations (/corporate executives) & government agencies (/government
officials, military officers & heads of agencies) in which toxic or
radioactive chemicals & wastes -- or, as in the case of oil, natural
substances used unnaturally -- have injured or killed hundreds of thousands
of human beings & their progeny, but do you think it would be possible &
desirable to have an international court comparable to the International
Criminal Court to prosecute crimes against nature (the environment, wildlife
& subcellular life forms)?

What other systematized ways can you think of to get people to think of
ecological crimes -- e.g., pollution, waste of energy, waste & despoilation
of natural resources, planned obsolescence, lack of mass transit, sub/urban
planning that necessitates long commutes, the destruction of species & their
habitats -- as being as reprehensible as rape, child abuse & sexploitation,
mass murder or genocide, & to act accordingly? (I'm ignoring the fact that
the UN & the EU are sitting with their thumbs in their assholes while
soldiers get medals, corporations get rich & politicians make hay out of
rape, child abuse & sexploitation, mass murder & genocide.) And to change
the current system in which the profits made from irresponsible/criminal
production, system designs & land/water/air (ab)use & exploitation are
privatized but taxpayers usually get stuck with the bills for clean-ups &
damage (in the rare instances where they occur)?

My only other idea -- for those beancounters & lawyers who insist on
quantifying the unquantifiable -- is that the costs of recycling or disposal
of every object should be computed into its sales price & stated on a label
just as ingredients, caloric/nutritional content & health warnings are given
(or obscured) now. Maybe also the value of resources used in production that
cannot be recycled. In the USA, we put the price of a nickel (or a dime in
Maine) on a soda/pop bottle (& water bottles in Maine & California). What's
the environmental cost of a nonreturnable water/juice/sports drink bottle or
the packaging materials of an Unhappy Meal? What's the environmental cost
when a creature eats that bottle? (Incidentally, tracking recyclable
components might be one use for RFIDs, but what are the environmental costs
of an RFID, the tools & energy used to track it, & its eventual
disposal/recycling?) Would such a resource use & recycling tax (a value-
subtracted tax, if you will) deter producers & consumers from sticking
future generations (if there are any) with the bills?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #63 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 07 08:56

    
Here's Clay Shirky and a colleague hammering out the
economics of Second Life by dredging up all kinds of
fragmentary data and putting it in charts.

http://tnl.net/blog/2007/01/05/running-the-numbers-on-second-life/

Boy this thing is awesomely dull.  I thought virtuality
was supposed to be all sense-of-wonder-ish.
  
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #64 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 07 09:20

    
I think the commons have eroded for a number of reasons.
Everybody concerned with them would like to have some
kind of high-level solution for this, one that goes
along with cool sociological phraseology like "the commons."
Like, is there a policy decision somewhere that would
legislate the commons?  Could I push the f-1 function
key and get some commons back?

But really: would you LIKE to be drafted just so you
can hang out with a bunch of armed guys with whom you share
no other interests?  You could join a political party.
You could volunteer with an NGO.  Those are "commons."
You'd find yourself making a whole lot of deeply felt,
open-ended personal commitments for no money. I know
people who do that.  A commons will cluster right around
them, they're community leaders, they've got a lot of friends.
I get tired just watching those people.

"The commons" isn't a single thing, it's a whole bunch
of little micro-acts of social capital, like throwing
open your doors and having a big party for all your
friends and anybody they want to bring along.  It feels great
when you do it, and you think, wow, I should do this more
often... but you could just go get a sixpack and watch
the Simpsons, and man, that's a whole lot cheaper.  Plus that
machine is a professional entertainer. Plus, I'm lazy.
I could go out and stir up a few quarts of "commons,"
or else I could just go out bowling alone.  Never mind,
I won't even go bowling.  Get some websurfing done here,
open me another bag o' potato chips.

People form big rambunctious supportive communities when
there's nothing much else to do.  A hoe-down and a barn-raising,
man, those were great.  You check out modern postindustrial America
and see how many single people live alone now.  Awesome numbers of
them.  Unprecedented.  Because now they can do it:
the market gives them food, shelter, clothing, the works.
They're not dependent on a commons.  If it erodes,
they don't suffer much from the loss.  If everybody's
ripping off little bits of it and nobody's restoring
it, of course the commons is gonna erode.  That's
"the tragedy of the commons."
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #65 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 8 Jan 07 09:44

    
"Not that courts are doing a very good job of adjudicating crimes
committed by corporations (/corporate executives) & government agencies
(/government officials, military officers & heads of agencies) in
which toxic or radioactive chemicals & wastes -- or, as in the case of
oil, natural substances used unnaturally -- have injured or killed
hundreds of thousands of human beings & their progeny, but do you think
it would be possible & desirable to have an international court
comparable to the International Criminal Court to prosecute crimes
against nature (the environment, wildlife
& subcellular life forms)?"

*It wouldn't surprise me at all if there were a lot of show trials
when the climate crisis hits the fan.  I don't think they're gonna be
because of crimes committed against "subcellular life forms."  I don't
think vacuoles and RNA strands can hire lawyers. 

*I'd be guessing that an International Crimes Court in a climate
crisis would work about as well as an International Crimes Court works
in any big crisis.  You can't try the entire population for crimes, --
and of course we're all guilty, to one degree or another -- so you
round up the loudest and most obvious malefactors, get them the hell
away from the levers of power, see if they'll testify against one
another...  You spend a whole lot of time worrying about the ones who
haven't been apprehended yet...  the ones who DO get apprehended
commonly don't have to dangle from a rope Saddam Hussein style, they
just do some time and get conjugal visits and eventually they drag on
home, where the recidivists throw 'em a big spaghetti dinner...  That's
how it works, the International Justice biz.

*I don't want to come across all cynical about this; I'd love to see
the entire board of directors of Exxon-Mobil in The Hague, especially
the retired ones, and I'd bet good money, too, that when they read the
newspapers and see how badly they misjudged the situation, they know
they belong there.  But we're not gonna be able to wave some magic
Hague wand and create worldwide green social justice and a completely
new and more advanced economic order through judicial activism.  That's
asking too much from international crimes courts, which are small,
clannish, poorly budgeted little institutions.

*I hang out in the Balkans a lot.  I've seen this kind of thing done. 
It's not that it's not worth doing.  I think it's quite likely to
happen; polluting the entire sky is the biggest market failure in the
history of the human race, when the Hamptons and Malibu start going
under water, really rich and powerful people are gonna get mad and
vengeful.  Something will bust loose, and a court is a better place for
that than a battlefield.  

*I wouldn't outguess the course of justice, either.  If Westinghouse
were running a climate-crimes court they'd indict hippies for blocking
nuclear power plants.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #66 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 8 Jan 07 13:32

    
Hmmm... don't give 'em any ideas.

That question about the Commons reminds me of Sandy Stone's taped
presentation a decade ago at a virtual community miniconference we put
together in Austin, also featuring Howard Rheingold and Tom Jennings.
Sandy noted that people originally sat on benches and in pews, i.e.
group seating arrangements, and the only guy who had a single chair was
the king. That was the real commons... people inherently thrown
together, whole families living in a single room, everybody sitting
together, eating together, talking and listening together. She followed
a line of evolution in the industrial middle classes, to a point where
nuclear families live one family to a house, and individuals are
isolated in their own rooms. If I remember correctly, she was saying
that the virtual community movement was an attempt to have a group life
again... neotribalism, we sometimes called it. Virtual community was
also a way to build new kinds of physical community - e.g. Burning Man
was organized online.

We think we want to be rugged individualists, but I think we all yearn
for the commons, or for community. We just inherently form groups. All
the social network research of the last few years suggests that the
network, the system of hubs, nodes, and connections, manifests an
inherent organizing principle... everything from cells to stars have
network structures.

To the extent there's been an erosion of the commons, I think it's so
detrimental to our nature that, one way or another, we'll regroup, but
to have a functional social commons you have to have trust, and we're a
little short of that particular item these days.

On New Years' Eve, I was at something called First Night in downtown
Austin. Thousands of people gathered for a parade, art extravaganza,
and fireworks. Every kind of person you could think of, hanging out
together, just milling around and digging the scene. It seems to me
that there are more and more of those massive gatherings.

Though I've never gone to Burning Man, I know a lot of people who do
go there, and they've formed strong social bonds. In an annual
Temporary Autonomous Zone, the form a commons the experience of which
has become the basis for just about everything they do. And they seem a
little more trusting, and more inclined to live communally.

Quite a few of those same people, incidentally, are engaged in
commons-based peer production via various Open Source development
projects. 

This is a bit of a ramble, I'm not sure where it's going; I guess the
bottom line is that I'm less sure that there's been an erosion of the
Commons.

***

Bruce, I've been meaning to ask you about outer space. You've written
your share of space fiction. What are your thoughts about commercial
space companies - Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic? And the mind-blowing
advances in space research over the last few years, from up-close
exploration of Mars to the just-published map of dark matter in the
universe? 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #67 of 104: Cogito, Ergo Spero (robertflink) Mon 8 Jan 07 19:25

    
>I have come to believe that, as a result of a long (40 year) series
of unintended consequences, the commons has been deeply eroded.<

The "commons" may actually be dynamic with aspects being added while
others are being lost. Global travel, education, the internet may be
considered examples of commons that have emerged over the last century
as accessible to large numbers of people.

BTW, the benefits of future predictions may be more in thinking in the
larger scope/scale than in the accuracy of any one prediction. This is
like the idea that planning is worthwhile even if a specific plan need
to be taken with a significant quantity of salt. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #68 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 07 02:33

    
I like outer space.

If you're a science fiction writer, as I am, and you say you like
outer space, it sounds very Captain Future and therefore kind of corny,
but the thing I like best about outer space is the irreducible
outerness of it.  It's bigger than human pretense.  It doesn't care
what we think.

 I mean: Saturn and the rings of Saturn, they're not  merely our
earthly  myths and  ideas and concepts of  Saturn... you can blast a
machine the size of a bus to go hang out in orbit there and snoop
around Saturn, and by golly, it's all ACTUALLY THERE.   The rings are
braided, there's, like, lightning blasts and weird gravitational fogs
flowing through them, giant permanent hurricanes, moons erupting,
fields of dunes, lakes of methane...   They're real, it's a real place,
and it's unearthly.   It's all churning along there, doing its  vast
and vigorous and utterly un-human thing, been there for billions of
years, doesn't mind about us and all the tiny, distant issues that make
us fret... That's a source of wonderment, really, and not the cheap
sleight-of-hand mystification that commonly poses as wonder, but
actual, irreducible wonder.    I think that's a healthy emotion for
human beings to have.  Wonderment at our role in this very strange
cosmos is a kind of realism.  We ought to make it our business to
understand a lot more about that.

When it comes to private, toy manned spaceships, I don't grudge the
geek ultra-wealthy their hobbies.  I wish those guys would take over
manned space exploration entirely, and that the entirety of NASA's
funding  would be spent on the science budget.    For the price of
political Buck Rogers pretenses we could saturate the solar system with
cheap videocams.  

I think manned space flight is a stunt at this point in time.  It's a
cool stunt, but it conveys very little in the way of practical
accomplishment.   Manned space flight is something like an extremely
expensive, heavily politicized Disney thrill ride.  If manned space
flight is  about the thrill for the sake of the thrill, it makes sense
to sell spaceflight as elite entertainment.  Why should we tax
ourselves for that kind of whimsy if Richard Branson can sell it?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #69 of 104: Richard Evans (rje) Tue 9 Jan 07 02:48

    
The problem is not whether or not to participate in a commons as such,
but rather what kind of commons to join.

Hanging out at Burning Man is not the same thing as hanging out at a
Southern Baptist Convention even though the participants of both may
feel they are participating in a kind of commons. 
 
In respect to the environment what is needed- in part- is not merely
new commons or networks but rather new sets of information and ways of
thinking which inform the structure and behaviour of those networks. Or
rather new ways to connect ideas to action.

It's a content thing.

After all even evil terrorist types use email to create a malignant
commons. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #70 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 07 02:49

    
"BTW, the benefits of future predictions may be more in thinking in
the larger scope/scale than in the accuracy of any one prediction. This
is like the idea that planning is worthwhile even if a specific plan
need to be taken with a significant quantity of salt."

It's been said that no plan survives contact with the enemy, but it's
also said that the *act* of planning is the key to victory.  I've been
to a lot of futurist scenario planning.   That conveys many of its
benefits as encounter therapy.  Just getting twenty-five people into a
room, dividing them into teams, getting them to focus on speculative
topics, getting them to interrelate while talking future strategy... A
lot of crowd-wisdom is unleashed by doing that.  

People can accomplish a hell of a lot in groups if they can get on the
same strategic page.   If an army thinks its cause is just and its
goals make sense, it's a formidable army, even if the war itself is
mistaken or absurd: "The War of Jenkins' Ear," for instance. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #71 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 07 05:05

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 9 Jan 07 07:55>
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #72 of 104: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Tue 9 Jan 07 05:31

    
<Sell out, man.  That's the answer.  It's gotta be money.  Huge
amounts of money.  Ford and Rockefeller amounts of money.  There isn't
any worlchanging mechanism that moves as fast, as ruthlessly, as
comprehensively as the market.>

Sorry to join this conversation late, but I need to seriously question
this assertion, or if not the assertion than the implications. 

John Robb has been running an interesting blog called "Global
Guerillas" and for some time he has been flogging the idea of "open
source warfare"--the concept that increasingly loose networks of fairly
autonomous cells can put their techniques out on the open net and
everyone can use them for free. Haven taken a couple spins through Iraq
and seen the idea in action, I think he's on to something. Despite the
serious diversity in groups waging war in Iraq, over time their
tactics and technologies tend to become similar. This is true even when
the groups involved seem diametrically opposed. For example, Shia
groups (probably supported or trained by Iranian Hizballah) were
probably the first elements in Iraq to use truly effective EFP IEDs
(which can destroy armor) and homemade claymore mines. But there wasn't
much of a lag time before Sunni groups started picking up the
techniques too. How the information transferred is certainly a matter
for investigation, but the bottom line is that it didn't take that long
and it apparently wasn't that difficult. There was a visible learning
curve when the Sunni groups started in, but the curve went fast.

Here's the real kicker, though: there's no reason on earth that the
"open source warfare" model cannot be applied to other revolutionary
human endeavors. For example, could an "insurgent" group develop a
technique for making cleaner fuel and spread the model to other groups?
I'd argue that with the advent of biodiesel refining (which can
literally be done in any garage) this is already happening. Watch what
happens if someone figures out which fungi can be readily made into
cellulytic digesters for ethanol feedstocks. It could be really
interesting. 

There are a lot of reasons why I think open source networks may prove
more effective than fabulously wealthy individuals. For one, it's
cheaper. Who the hell is going to buy music from David Geffen when they
can download for free? The Gates and Rockefellers of the world will
certainly try to control how and where their money is used. People who
are less financially empowered may not agree, and so they will find
ways to go around the need for finances. For another, it's not that
hard. Not everyone is smart enough to design an infrared IED trigger,
but once the basic elements are prepared it's not that hard to cobble
one together. There are "hackers" embedded in every revolutionary
community, and once they figure their thing out the information spreads
quickly. In addition, there are a lot more open source network members
than there are fabulously individuals, so in the aggregate their
efforts may count for more. Finally, the availability of world-changing
technology has really flattened out. The internal combustion engine is
everywhere, the internet is damn near everywhere, and in time we will
probably see technologies like nano-assembly and gene hacking
everywhere. (As an interesting aside, my brother with his new BS in
botany tells me that plant genetic engineering technology may reach
garage level in about a decade. Maybe he's just an optimistic
twentysomething, but what if he's right? How do you control technology
like that?) As a confluence of factors creates a more chaotic future,
there will be more and more external motivation for revolutionary
networks to stand up and try their hand at changing the world. I think
it's inevitable, and hierarchies will not be able to put a lid on it.
As a member of a hierarchy, I have developed a respect for the networks
that are kicking our ass for pennies on the dollar. 

This does not mean, of course, that rule by open source networks is
going to be a wholly positive thing. The megacity of Lagos can be
looked upon as a massive adaptive open source system, but most
observers consider it a disaster. Still, we've had rule by wealthy
elites for some time, and it's not a wholly positive phenomenon either.
The future isn't going to be boring, that's for sure.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #73 of 104: Credo, Ergo Dubito (robertflink) Tue 9 Jan 07 06:18

    
>I think that's a healthy emotion for human beings to have. 
Wonderment at our role in this very strange cosmos is a kind of
realism.  We ought to make it our business to understand a lot more
about that.<

I like the idea that "wonder" is more real than "knowing". "Knowing"
may be more appealing to those for whom "wonder" is a fearful thing. 
"Wonder" speaks of openness. "Knowing" as in the case of certitude may
well be a dead end.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #74 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 07 08:10

    
Reading #70 above, I flashed on a vision of futurist politicians. How
different would the world be if legislators spent their sessions in
charrettes, planning and validating scenarios?

echodog, does "Open Source" really present an alternative to markets
and wealth? Or is it just about a different medium of exchange?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #75 of 104: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Tue 9 Jan 07 09:20

    
The budget for the Mars Rover project (Spirit & Opportunity) came to just a
bit more than a single pre-Columbia shuttle launch. While the Mars Rover
budget has been boosted, no doubt, as the bots keep going, the cost per
launch of the shuttle is much higher now, too, post-Columbia.

Jon, I can tell you that it's really interesting to see political leaders
grappling with scenarios. I was in Hawaii for the kick off of the
Sustainability 2050 project, a massive futurism exercise funded by the
Hawaii legislature over the veto of the governor. Lots of legislators were
in attendance, and they really got into it. I'm not sure how much they got
the process, but they clearly were engaged with the content.

<echodog>, your brother isn't an optimist, he's being overly conservative.
Plant genetics isn't just garage, it's *kid's toys*:

http://tinyurl.com/xlhn

(Discovery Channel "DNA Explorer for Kids" -- includes centrifuge, magnetic
mixer, and electrophoresis chamber. $80. Been out for a couple of years
now.)

Serious plant genetic engineering is available to moderately talented
undergrads now, and will probably be possible in high schools within a
decade. Take a look at "Carlson Curves:"

http://synthesis.typepad.com/synthesis/2006/08/bedroom_biology.html
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #76 of 104: Vlidi from Belgrade (bumbaugh) Tue 9 Jan 07 09:40

    

Vlidi writes, saying:



Dear people of well.com ,
I would like to post some questions to the "State of the World 2007" thread,
to my
fellow Belgradian Bruce Sterling :-), and I am not a well.com member (even
if I could
afford the membership, which I can not, most of the credit cards we are
being issued
here are some "funny cards" and do not work online, or anywhere, for that
matter).
I hope it is not too much of a hastle.
Thanks in advance!
And, thanks for this great piece of work, well.com...
Best,
Vlidi.

the questions:

Dear Bruce,

I am writing this first as your new Belgradian neighbor â€“and as with
everybody else, there is a constant flow of substantial and unexpected
changes in my life happening for quite some time - a year ago, reading
"State of the World 2006"  I couldn't have dreamt of having you addressing
the issues from Belgrade, Serbia. So anything IS possible.

Not that it matters that much - but ofcourse it does matter up to a certain
extent - from which geopolitical aspect one's ones and zeros are pouring
into Net, so while you are here, there are a few things I would like to peak
your crystal ball at, for some hints on possible futures...

The first being (and coming from this perspective) about what we agreed to
call "a digital divide". Now, from pretty much un-wired and offline
environment as Serbia (today) is, how the tomorrow looks like to you for (on
ICT map) a "third world" societies? What do you expect from
OneLaptopPerChild project and similar future initiatives, with millions of
kids from the cultures and historical and cultural backgrounds most of us
don't have a clue about joining the Net for the first time? Will that mean a
gradual death of proprietary software (I think they agreed that OLPC laptops
will initially run Fedora/Red Hat customized distros)? And will it mean the
absolute death of existing traditional copyright legislation, the one being
still predominant in the West, at least in the official discourse (I don't
think those kids will care much for copyright notices, and I am sure the
first thing they will search for and share once online will be media files,
any media files)? While there, will this kind of computer education
development mean that we will have a generations of new open source
programmers worldwide who grew up in open/free environment, awake and on
IM/forums/wikis 24/7, so the solution for any problem or need anybody may
have with software, firmware and related issues will be minutes away? Will
it lead to producing modular hardware "bricks", business surrendering
developing, support or even initial purpose of the devices to users and big
and small derivative open source ventures?

Additionally, what shifts and changes, from the perspective of culture and
communication, we can expect as a consequence of transition of India, and
especially China, from the biggest manufacturers to the biggest markets
(middle class in China is rising at the speed of light)? Capital won't
resist the temptation to win the biggest market ever, so how the design and
marketing campaigns adjusted to far East markets will backfire and affect
the West? Should we better all start to learn our Mandarin (I am slowly
considering it already :-)? English is now represented at just around 30%
among the languages used on the Net (and I guess India is what's holding
English that high), and is gradually shrinking... But, even more important
then the language is the culture, high theories, historical influences and
everyday practices, that are just not compatible or even recognizable from
the background of Western cultural heritage...

As the author who made more or less a total switch to e-production (BTW, can
you tell more about reasons for leaving the Wired column? I guess that there
is more then ecology involved... and does that mean that you will publish
just e-books in the future?) can you give us an opinion on issues of
"content ownership" and consequently the possible revenue models for authors
who, unlike you, still think that they should dedicate 100% of their time to
the particular work they are engaged with at the moment, the people who
usually call themselves "artists" or "theorists" or "experts/professionals",
not really multitasking-inclined? Voluntarism, enthusiasm, activism and
other models exploited by cognitive capitalism and "creative industries"
approach have the feel of "temporary" and "transitional". What you see
trough your crystal ball as the more sustainable solution (fully aware of
the constant evolving, shape-shifting and "unstable" attributes of the "new
media")? Being involved with emerging local CC and other similar processes
and being an author of a kind myself, I am very curious about your views...

Complementary question is: if all the archives will be open and all the
content produced will be free to use (both as a speech and as a beer), how
do you see the possibility of reaching the "tipping point", will there be a
day from which no "original" content will be produced, and from that moment
on all of the "cultural output" will be a remix, a mash-up, a "derivate
work", however distant in the future that day may be? "Adjusting" the
existing approaches and ideas to specific imagery or fashion of tomorrow not
considered as "art", in this example... Is that scenario even theoretically
possible, do you think that there may be a critical mass of "cultural
modules" from which all the possible further articulations may be derived
upon (additionally complicated with "expected" development of
humans&technology in the meantime, except for not-yet-very-likely
incidentally pushing some "singularity-authorized access only" button)? Is
this a "numbers game", at all? Or you believe that what we call "creativity"
and "originality" is so inherent to humanity that it will never be replaced
by another "tool" (making this probably the most stupid question you were
ever asked)?

Another related: why is Net still such a detached, incomprehensible and
almost scary place for a lot of people who could accept it, generation and
infrastructure-wise? Why people still mostly use the Net as a supplement for
what is known already, instead of unleashing all the new possibilities
inherent to it?

So sorry if all this is not formulated in a more accurate way and with less
words, I hope you "feel" what I want to ask :-) And sorry for all the
references to your top-level precog powers â€“ I just couldn't resist :-)

I would have a million questions more, but wouldn't like to create a
congestion or to take too much of your time... It still feels great to hear
"reports" about your occasional visits to places like local activist's
offices and festivals of SF - I hope you enjoy your time here...

All the best,
Vlidi, Belgrade.

P.S. I just couldn't resist this one, as well â€“ and it would be at least
polite to join the predominantly environmental course of this thread â€“ so
it is inevitably happening tomorrow or the day after, so we may do something
about it or not, but â€“ what comes "after the heating"? Will there be a
sudden shift in the very concept of politics, nations, religions,
competition, "markets" and alike, as a consequence of that ultimate
experience? What society/societies may emerge? Or will "social virus"
survive along with it's exhausted host, hibernating until triggered by
another possibility to act?
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #77 of 104: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Tue 9 Jan 07 10:26

    
I don't think open source represents a new medium of exchange, as
such. I think it actually represents a massive shift in the way
business is conducted. It's not especially new--old coders would
consider this history. But I think it's growing, and likely to undercut
a number of our traditional hierarchal systems pretty soon.

Hey, I think I'll get me one of those DNA kits...
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #78 of 104: Jasmina Tesanovic (jasminate) Tue 9 Jan 07 13:01

    
hi all, from ruritania serbia, from Buce's apartment in Belgrade
the globalization of balkanization is underway
the transition to nowhere 
reading all the issues you talk about here
having in mind the digital divide, the gender divide inside the
digital divide
and the importance of being a citizen in the world, even if you are
faking it as we do all these years in ruritania serbia
i wonder
why all these internet games such as warcraft or second life
are not used for constructive purposes other than escapism
fun virtual virtuosity
why can't we use that kind of interface for controlling the elections
for example 
for  trials on line
for monitoring social issues
sex drugs and rock and roll are my biggest joy
but there is no better drug than truth and justice

jasmina's blog http://blog.b92.net/blog/22
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #79 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 9 Jan 07 13:38

    
Now, from pretty much un-wired and offline
environment as Serbia (today) is, how the tomorrow looks like to you
for (on ICT map) a "third world" societies? What do you expect from
OneLaptopPerChild project and similar future initiatives, with
millions of kids from the cultures and historical and cultural
backgrounds most of us don't have a clue about joining the Net for the
first time? Will that mean a gradual death of proprietary software (I
think they agreed that OLPC laptops will initially run Fedora/Red Hat
customized distros)? 

*I don't think Serbia has to worry much about its unwired status when
the locals are asking such intensely knowledgeable questions about
Fedora/Red Hat customized distros.  As I sit here in Belgrade typing
this I've got broadband and six different wi-fi signals.  Mine's the
only wi-fi offering open access, for obvious ideologically-correct
cyberpunk reasons, but hey, they're all there and none were here a year
ago.

I don't believe in the "Third World."  Where's the Second One?
We've got globalization and balkanization, or the Core and the
Non-Integrating Gap.

http://www.thomaspmbarnett.com/Map_index.htm

The problem with Barnett's analysis is that it conflates socialist
states with areas in state collapse.  Venezuela is of great interest to
Barnett obviously, because he's Pentagon, but the only way Venezuela
will collapse will be if the US Army kicks it over.  In my opinion the
areas in collapse are a lot scarier than the leftist states.  Changing
a regime is a picnic.  Restoring civil order is enough to cripple a
superpower.

These boundaries aren't rigid, either.  There are patches of order in
the Gap and patches of gap in the Order.  The Gap is also the planet's
nursery.  Eighty-five percent of the planet's young people live there.

Serbia is Gap.  In fact, Serbia is a kind of world capital of Gap. 
It's a great place for a futurist, there are a lot of trends set here.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #80 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 07 15:10

    <scribbled by jonl Tue 9 Jan 07 20:59>
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #81 of 104: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 9 Jan 07 15:39

    
Good to see you, Jasmina. And Vlidi -- originality can't die when you
have such novel questions.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #82 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 9 Jan 07 20:59

    
echodog: I said 'different' medium of exchange, not 'new.' Nothing
new about it - people have been bartering or donating their skills and
work products forever. And it's one thing for Open Source to function
alongside a system that creates fabulous wealth for some, quite
another for it to supplant that system entirely. I think it's more of a
'both-and' than an 'either-or.' 

Jamais: in all of our worldchanging work, maybe we should focus most
on creating more scenes like Sustainability 2050. We should take that
process on the road.

Jasmina - a big Texas hello! Why is it that sex, drugs and rock and
roll are not used for constructive purposes other than escapism?
(Actually, Second Life people will tell you that it's used
constructively every day... that it's not a game but an alternate
reality. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #83 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 10 Jan 07 03:36

    


"Another related: why is Net still such a detached, incomprehensible
and almost scary place for a lot of people who could accept it,
generation and infrastructure-wise? Why people still mostly use the Net
as a supplement for what is known already, instead of unleashing all
the new possibilities inherent to it?"

*Those are really good questions.  In thinking it over, I have to
blame the people.   Really: it's people who are detached,
incomprehensible and almost scary. Not the machines.  In the pre-Web
days, the Internet had line commands.  You had to grasp UNIX to do most
anything useful, but the *content* of the web wasn't scary; it was
mostly dry stuff like mailing lists.  They were mailing lists about
subjects like trying to program in ADA for the Defense Department. 
They were densely technical, geeky and dull documents full of acronyms
and with maybe some pseudo-code, but they weren't, like, *insane.* 
Medical texts sounded weirder.

*Then the barriers to entry crashed, and now you can read bizarre
stuff like mash-up filter-dodging spam, which is really a torrent of
absolute verbal nonsense.  Partisan bloggers live in their own little
headspaces.  Political activists used to go mix it up with the commons
in the street, they wanted to know what "the people" felt about things.
 The pajamahideen really ARE detached and scary, their blogs are like
goldfish bowls where the filter broke.  Way too many of 'em are scarily
detached, remote-control wonk-geeks and pundit-geeks: they don't care
any more about objective political reality than somebody playing
WARCRAFT.  

*People blatantly try to deceive you and rob you in your email, with
all kinds of theft, fraud and pr0n pitches...  The porn and voyeur
scene on the Internet is like nothing in human history.  The Internet
doesn't just publicize deviant sex behavior; it's got some kind of
amazing long-tail generator that spews unheard-of mini-demographic
micro-perversions.  Kinks that are shared by a group of, I dunno, maybe
six people.  

If you'd never seen the net before and you blundered into that, it
would have to be really scary and alienating.  The Internet really IS
unleashing new possibilities inherent to itself, and sometimes, it
truly makes you wonder.  Who is the human race?  Who did we think we
were?  
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #84 of 104: pardon my amygdala (murffy) Wed 10 Jan 07 06:10

    
>Who did we think we were?  

Great question. Much easier to answer than "Who do we think we are?"
By "easier", I mean exceedingly difficult.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #85 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 10 Jan 07 09:12

    
Imagine Teihard de Chardin, back from the grave, discovering with
initial wonder the noosphere did in fact form around the planet.
Looking closely, he finds that it's 80% bondage porn and ranting
narcissism. I guess that's the real heart of darkness.

In Zen Buddhist meditation, there's a phenomenon called makyo, a kind
of mental noise that masquerades as signal; a nightmare that will
sometimes pretend to be kensho (enlightenment), and derail the
practitioner.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #86 of 104: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Wed 10 Jan 07 10:04

    
80% crap would be 10% lower than expectation.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #87 of 104: "The Best for Your Health!" (rik) Wed 10 Jan 07 10:16

    
I think you're being kind, jef.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #88 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 10 Jan 07 10:36

    
(I was trying to be kind.)
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #89 of 104: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Wed 10 Jan 07 12:17

    
I was just quoting the law.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #90 of 104: 'Yanni S.' (bumbaugh) Wed 10 Jan 07 13:02

    
Yanni writes:


Here's a depressing prediction that I just read in Wired, which sort of
moves in the opposite direction from "rule by open-source":

The net will become distributed among a limited number of proprietary
devices (PDA's, media-file players), out of the sheer necessity of not
being spammed or infected with a virus; the PC (and, one assumes by
extension, open-source) will follow along the slow, sad decline of
Citizen's-Band radio.

http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/15.01/start.html?pg=15
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #91 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 11 Jan 07 07:27

    
The Core and the Non-Integrating Gap also applies to the Internet.
Proprietary Devices would be commercial corporate Core, and the
viruses would be state-failure and terror.  Open-source is commons. 
Commons is persistent and beloved, but it's not doing all that great.

That may be a "depressing prediction," but it's not a given that
we pull through this.  It's good to confront such possibilities
squarely, instead of just turning up the megaphones and bellowing that
we'll cakewalk through Baghdad.  The Internet scene is menacing and
unhealthy in many obvious ways.  Ninety percent of email is spam. 

We're gonna get the Internet we deserve.   If that's depressing, it's
because we are depressing.  If we are depressing, then we ought to
shape up.

It's an embarrassment when you see a golden idol reveal its feet of
clay.  It can be disillusioning.  But if you're not illusioned in the
first place, the spectacle's not so bad.  If you look where the
Internet came from, it wasn't that golden a situation.  In 1960, the
ARPANET was like a cross between Licklider's daffy comp-sci dream of
computer-human symbiosis and a Pentagon drill for a post-nuclear
holocaust. 

 We don't have a word for an idol of clay that has feet of gold.  But
you know, they often do.  

If we can't see a way forward, that doesn't prove there isn't one. 
Optimism is often blinkered, but pessimism can be a kind of arrogance. 
We don't know every important factor that determines the shape of
tomorrow.  We ought to show a little healthy humility before we indulge
ourselves in the luxury of utter despair.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #92 of 104: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Thu 11 Jan 07 08:38

    
"Pessimism is a luxury of good times. In difficult times, pessimism is a
self-fulfilling, self-inflicted death sentence."

--Norwegian social scientist Evelin Lindner
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #93 of 104: Cupido, Ergo Denego (robertflink) Thu 11 Jan 07 15:10

    
>But if you're not illusioned in the first place, the spectacle's not
so bad.<

But where is the room for idealism?  Without illusions, the human race
would be satisfied with mediocrity. ("To dream the impossible dream,
to fight the unbeatable foe,..........."). 

How about "optimistic pessimism" or "pessimistic optimism"?

Great quote from Lindner, BTW.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #94 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 11 Jan 07 20:40

    
But against the palpably sophistical proofs of Leibniz that this is
the best of all possible worlds, we may even oppose seriously and
honestly the proof that it is the worst of all possible worlds. For
possible means not what we may picture in our imagination, but what can
actually exist and last. Now this world is arranged as it had to be if
it were to be capable of continuing with great difficulty to exist; if
it were a little worse, it would be no longer capable of continuing to
exist. Consequently, since a worse world could not continue to exist,
it is absolutely impossible; and so this world itself is the worst of
all possible worlds.

~ Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation, Vol. II, Ch. 46.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #95 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 07 01:31

    
I'm totally into dreaming impossible dreams.  Got no problem with
that.  It's a business model, even.  The problem comes with dreaming
impossible dreams, discovering  that they don't match the objective
state of the actual world, and declaring that the world is therefor
mediocre. 

 If the world had been created to match up to our ideals, there would
never have been such a thing as, say, quantum physics. That just
flat-out wasn't dreamt of in our philosophy.  Quarks.  What is all THAT
about?  Is THAT supposed to make this the best of all possible worlds?
  Strangeness, charm, up, down.  As far as we can figure, that's how
the world actually *works.*  Are we supposed to be optimistic or
pessimistic about it?  

"Wow, man, quarks.  I'm so upbeat and affirmative about those!"

"No, no, this sorry world has far too many random quantum
fluctuations.  Schrodinger's cat was doomed from the beginning!"  

Are quarks mediocre?  Should we fight them as an unbeatable foe? 
Should we hold our breath until they go away? Or celebrate them in the
streets?  It seems to me that the proper attitude toward phenomena like
quarks isn't pragmatism or idealism or pessimism or optimism or any
-ism at all, really.  It ought to be a sense of engagement.  Of
wonderment.  That's a pretty tepid attitude compared to declaring a
bold crusade against quarks, but you learn more that way.  

As a futurist, I've come to feel that optimism and pessimism are
serious intellectual vices.  They truly cripple your ability to come to
grips with likely courses of development.  You can't properly
entertain just-upside scenarios or just-downside scenarios.   That's
like wearing a blinder over one eye.  

I myself tend to be a rather acerbic, dismissive, Mencken-like figure,
but that's just a matter of my personal temperament.  That's not the
way the world actually functions.  Politics doesn't exist in order to
give me sardonic chuckles; I mean, yeah, I get a hell of a lot of them,
but that's not what politics is actually trying to do.

To do serious futurism you need to think historically.  The future is
a kind of history that hasn't happened yet.  If someone asked if you
were optimistic or pessimistic about the 19th century, that question
would have no meaning.  If you wrote a book about the 19th century and
you said it was the worst of all possible centuries and that only glum,
terrible, and degrading things happened then, you'd be clearly
fraudulent.  You wouldn't be considered a great historian; it'd be
obvious to everybody that you had some kind of bee in your bonnet.

When it comes to future events rather than past ones, we should try
for an even-tempered historical judgment.  It's more important to seek
an understanding of the determining factors than it is to hasten to
praise or blame. 

 Many of those factors, the driving forces that shape tomorrow, are
very, very old.  Like, say, the spread of the English language. 
English was spreading long before we were born and will continue to
spread long after we're dead.  Even though we're users of English here
and obviously moral actors in that process, we can't take that entirely
to heart and declare that it's all our own fault or virtue.  The
spread of English has good aspects and it has bad aspects, but our
ability to do anything about that in our frail mortal lifetimes is
limited.  It's a vast historical process.  It doesn't exist to please
us or displease us.  It's not our friend or our enemy.  It was what is
was, it is what it is, and it will be whatever it will be.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #96 of 104: Cupido, Ergo Denego (robertflink) Fri 12 Jan 07 06:52

    
>Even though we're users of English here and obviously moral actors in
that process, we can't take that entirely to heart and declare that
it's all our own fault or virtue.<

It may be that the praise and blame game is testimony to an underlying
belief that some form of agency makes the world happen. I think that
the question "why?" has such implications, suggestion a "will" behind
phenomena. "How?" is a more modest, neutral question that points us to
understanding the determining factors and to staying relatively free of
placing praise or blame. (We also miss the fun, of course.)

In this vein, praise and blame can be seen as evidence of belief in
miracles even when it they (praise and blame) are offered by a nominal
atheist.  
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #97 of 104: Gregory Naughton (bumbaugh) Fri 12 Jan 07 07:28

    
Grogry writes:


(Er, Gregory writes:)


To go along with the post from Shebar Windstone,

I had this idea sometime ago which strikes me as still a good one which
would be to in some measure introduce a federal program to produce, handle,
and recycle a standardized set of multi-purpose containers.  These would
accommodate a wide range of conceivable shapes and sizes -- especially for
soft-drinks, water bottles, glass jars, etc.

It seems that there is a good deal of overlap with most products in the
grocery store where the containers could be generalized, categorized and
manufactured according to strict specifications.  How this would work is
that say, you package your applesauce in a glass jar of type B13, so B13 has
a set lid and glass jar.  Ragu also uses B13 for Spaghetti sauce, etc..  Now
that we know everything about B13, its size, measurement, lid-fitting, etc,
then instead of having to melt the jars down and re-create them after each
usage, we merely need to collect them and powerwash them suckers and then
out the door they go, shipped off to whoever the next guy in line is who
needs a palette of B13 jars, back through the cycle again.  You do this for
as long as you can until they become too damaged.

It seems that federalizing of something so low-level and so simple, but so
essential to daily life would eliminate a good deal of energy waste and
reduce landfill size, etc..

How do you get companies to bother to use these jars?  A tax credit or
incentive probably.  They wouldn't be for everybody, but it would make your
company look cool if you used them.  I think it would work, I just never
knew who to tell it to.

This bottle deal seems to suggest a larger metaphor for instantiating
federal programs to take over some of the trivial aspects of every day
existence that aren't critical to expression or vanity but are entirely
necessary and do so with an eye to smart design, re-usability and clever
frugality.  The solution(s) to global warming no doubt consist of lots and
lots of small hacks that add up, smarter ways to do the same old thing.  the
trick is just recognizing what those are.

I suppose that this presupposes an intelligent enough electorate?

Sincerely,
Greg Naughton
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #98 of 104: Berliner (captward) Fri 12 Jan 07 08:30

    
Actually, the container thing is in limited use in Germany; when I
have empty bottles, I can go to a machine at my supermarket and feed
them through one by one and the readout says "Becks .5L" or "Volvic
PET" or whatever, not because that was what was in the actual bottles
I'm returning, but because that's the form factor, after which I press
a button and get a credit receipt out. But it not only does beer and
water bottles, but various sizes of yoghurt jars and so on. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #99 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 12 Jan 07 11:42

    
*Wa-ha-ha!  Best news I've had this year!  Some lamps of
mine have shown up here in Belgrade customs!  The lamps I designed are
actually physically existing and for sale!  People are buying them!

http://www.annalena.fr

*If I can get them out of the hands of the puzzled shippers,
I'll actually own some copies of my own designer lamp!

*This is a stereotypical story of design, ladies and gentlemen...
even though these lamps are made of the CHEAPEST AND
HUMBLEST INDUSTRIAL MATERIALS POSSIBLE, literal 
plastic cable clamps...

http://www.cableclamp.com/

...because they are hand-assembled in a tony Parisian
atelier and sold through galleries, they are pricy
art objets that will set you back a cool USD1,500!
I wouldn't dream of buying such a thing.  But, you
know, people do.

*I don't think they plan to make many.  It's too onerous.
If, for some strange reason, you really need one,
better move fast.

PS, yes, it is a fluorescent lamp with green credentials...

PPS.  They come with French, not US wiring...

PPPS there may be a little trouble at Customs...

This is a fine high-note in which to cruise out of this
State of The World discussion.  I gotta pack.  I'm heading
for San Francisco.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #100 of 104: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 12 Jan 07 12:11

    
There's a very real economic issue here - reusability has impact on
churn that puts bread on somebody's table. Similar issue with fossil
fuels - if we could go 100% solar/electric tomorrow and eliminate our
need for gasoline, we would trash a whole economy built around
petroleum. A significant weakness within the environmental community is
its failure to acknowledge and address the economic impact of proposed
solutions.  On the other hand, we suspect that there are significant
business opportunities related to sustainability and energy efficiency.

So I would say that, if Greg was going to write a proposal to
"introduce a federal program to produce, handle, and recycle a
standardized set of multi-purpose containers," he would want to show
the impact on exisiting business and, to extent it's a negative impact,
how to mitigate the down side, no?  And perhaps demonstrate any
related opportunities for new business.

***
Slippage, as we say on the WELL (i.e. Bruce posted while I was writing
the abover response). Bruce, I recall fiddling with those clamps at
your house in Austin some time ago - I never could make 'em into
anything cohesive. Congratulations!

Hopefully one of our hosts can summarize this discussion and figure
out what we said about the state of the world. The news ain't great:
more war, in fact a military *surge* that might accidentally leak into
Iran,  while old-fashioned Marxists are attacking the U.S. in Greece
(!!!)... and bitter cold and ice are on the way, despite global
warming.

Martin Luther King's birthday is Monday, and I just heard a news story
about a scrap of paper he carried with him, where he'd written a quote
from Mahatma Gandhi, and this is probably a good quote to wrap things
up: 

"...in the midst of death life persists, in the midst of untruth,
truth persists, in the midst of darkness light persists."
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #101 of 104: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Fri 12 Jan 07 14:07

    
And what a light with which to begin 2007!

Thank you Jon and Bruce, and thanks to everyone who joined in this
wandering, speculative, informed, enlightening, frightening, and uplifiting
consideration of the state of things.

Safe travels, Bruce.

And, of course, we'll leave the doors open here for conversation to continue
as long as the conversants conspire to make it so.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #102 of 104: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 13 Jan 07 07:36

    
Here I go:

http://www.bampfa.berkeley.edu/about_bampfa/avantgarde.html

New Media and Social Memory

Jan. 18, 2007??The UC Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive is
proud to present New Media & Social Memory, a public symposium to
discuss strategies for preserving digital art at a time when digital
technologies are evolving and becoming obsolete at an astonishingly
rapid pace. 

While focussing on digital art, the symposium will also address larger
concerns about the long-term conservation of our increasingly digital
culture, including how we decide what digital content - from Web sites
to video games - are worth saving. The full day of presentations and
panel discussions by leading experts in the field of digital
preservation will be held in the museum theater on Thursday, Jan. 18.
This symposium is open to the public free of charge; however, due to
limited space, online registration is required.

Symposium Program??10:00-10:15?Introductions?Richard Rinehart, Digital
Media Director & Adjunct Curator, BAM/PFA?Jane Metcalfe, Founder &
Original Publisher, Wired Magazine, BAM/PFA Board
10:15-11:00?Stewart Brand, President, Long Now Foundation
11:10-12:00?Stewart Brand, President, Long Now Foundation, in
conversation with?Kevin Kelly, Editor at Large, Wired Magazine?Jon
Ippolito, Assistant Professor of New Media, University of Maine
12:00-1:00?Lunch break
1:10-2:00?Alexander Rose, Executive Director, Long Now Foundation?Kurt
Bollacker, Digital Research Director, Long Now Foundation
2:10-3:00?Marisa Olsen, Editor and Writer, Rhizome.org?Michael
Katchen, Archivist, Franklin Furnace
3:10-4:00?Jeff Rothenberg, Computer Scientist?Richard Rinehart,
Digital Media Director & Adjunct Curator, BAM/PFA
4:10-5:00?Bruce Sterling, Author, Founder, Dead Media Project
5:00-7:00?Public reception??Contact: Richard Rinehart,
rinehart@berkeley.edu. Archiving the Avant Garde: Documenting and
Preserving Digital/Media Art is a consortium project of the University
of California, Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, with the
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, Cleveland Performance Art Festival and
Archive, Franklin Furnace Archive, and Rhizome.org, and is generously
supported by the National Endowment for the Arts.
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #103 of 104: Christian De Leon-Horton (echodog) Sat 13 Jan 07 10:10

    
<Open-source is commons. Commons is persistent and beloved, but it's
not doing all that great.>

It's kicking our ass in Baghdad. If it works in war, I have a hard
time understanding why it won't work in other endeavors as well.
Perhaps it only works when a bunch of little people get pissed off and
decide victory is more important than profit, I don't know. 
  

inkwell.vue.289 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2007
permalink #104 of 104: Hal Royaltey (hal) Sun 14 Jan 07 16:13

    
I'll add my thanks to <bumbaugh>s.   

What a great start to the New Year.
  

