inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #0 of 116: What is going to amuse our bouches now? (bumbaugh) Mon 31 Dec 07 11:50

    
We ring in the new year with our ninth annual visit from Bruce Sterling, in
which we review recent events, gaze into the future, and generally discuss
the state of the world.

Bruce Sterling, author, journalist, editor, and critic, was born in 1954.
Best known for his eight science fiction novels, he also writes short
stories, book reviews, design criticism, opinion columns, and introductions
for books ranging from Ernst Juenger to Jules Verne. His nonfiction works
include THE HACKER CRACKDOWN: LAW AND DISORDER ON THE ELECTRONIC FRONTIER
(1992) and TOMORROW NOW:  ENVISIONING THE NEXT FIFTY YEARS (2003). He is a
contributing editor of WIRED magazine and a columnist for MAKE magazine.

During 2005, he was the "Visionary in Residence" at Art Center College of
Design in Pasadena and is currently the guest curator for the SHARE Digital
Culture Festival in Torino, Italy.

He has appeared in ABC's Nightline, BBC's The Late Show, CBC's Morningside,
on MTV and TechTV, and in Time, Newsweek, The Wall Street Journal, the New
York Times, Fortune, Nature, I.D., Metropolis, Technology Review, Der
Spiegel, La Repubblica, and many other venues.

Our interlocutor with Bruce is Jon Lebkowsky, an authority on social media
and online community and, like Bruce, a longtime member of the Well.

Jon writes about culture, technology, media, sustainability and other
topics for various publications, and has been blogging regularly since
2000. In 1991 he cofounded the pioneering online company FringeWare, Inc.,
the first company to attempt e-commerce. The company published the
influential magazine FringeWare Review, which had an international
distribution. He worked with bOING bOING (as associate editor for the
original paper zine), HotWired, The Whole Earth Catalog, Electric Minds,
and many other web and cyberculture projects and endeavors during the World
Wide Web's first decade. In the late 90s, he was actively involved in the
creation of various e-commerce and community initiatives for Whole Foods
Market (and gained quite a few pounds, for obvious reasons).

So, guys, how *are* things? What's going to hell in a hand basket? About
what can we be optimistic? How is this New Year's different from all other
turnings of the calendar?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #1 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 31 Dec 07 13:08

    
Everything's peachy, with a few exceptions... the economy of the USA
is crumbling, of course, and the U.S. government's bleeding dollars (as
well as real American blood) in Iraq. Climate change is accelerating,
polar ice caps are melting, whole species are disappearing.  Developing
nations want their chance to be the next USA, and they're not
especially interested in hearing that it's not possible for everyone to
leverage the same increasingly limited resources. 

What happens when we pay everybody in the world a living wage, and
give 'em all a chance to own an SUV and a house in the suburbs? How
many worlds would it take to float that boat? How pissed are they going
to be when they realize "lifestyles of the rich and famous don't
scale," in fact the lifestyle of the typical middle-class American is
not sustainable.

I'm writing from a quiet neighborhood in Texas where everybody's
preparing for New Year's Eve. They'll celebrate like always, drink more
than they should, ogle the street performances and art at First Night
downtown, watch fireworks like it's the fourth of July, Tomorrow
they'll watch football and eat a spoonful of black-eyed peas for luck.
Nobody's freaking out yet, but they're shaky. And well they should be.

I'm not worried. I see via Boing Boing that I can buy moldable moon
sand and pancakes in a can. I'm okay, as long as the RIAA doesn't catch
me copying a song from a CD that I supposedly own to a computer that
I'm pretty sure I own. Or maybe I don't own anything; maybe I'm just
renting - licensing - all my surroundings.  I hope they don't repossess
that candle before it burns out...

At least I'm not living in Kenya, where all hell's broken loose after
the latest election.  I'm not living in Pakistan, where Bhutto was
martyred last week, assassinated, no doubt, by some Pakistani Lee
Harvey Oswald. Politics in the U.S.A. is safe, right? We're completely
civilized. 

In the geek circles that Bruce and I both know so well, there's no
real sense of urgency about the state of the world, at least that I can
see. I wonder about that.

So my first question for Bruce: how's Torino?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #2 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 08 04:07

    
Well, we were off to a rocking start here in Torino when New Years Eve
was cancelled for 2008.  Instead of fireworks, booze and public
hijinks, the Mayor commissioned a solemn march of mourning for seven
laborers who have died in a local industrial accident.

So I was out on the streets last night... they were eerie.  The only
people hitting the bottle and partying were the local Arabs, who were
blasting rai music and throwing glass and fireworks out of their
tenement windows...  There were also a few puzzled tourists who didn't
seem to get the last-minute bulletin.

The rest of the population seemed to fall in line as one with the
wishes of the Mayor and the Archbishop.   They just shuttered the show,
end of story.  

You always hear tell from other Italians that the Turinese are a
solemn, reserved and disciplined lot....  I wrote that story off
because, by American standards, it's hard to find any fraction of the
Italian populace that comes across as genuinely solemn and reserved.  
But to cancel New Years -- even cancel *private parties* -- is really a
surprising and impressive gesture.

So: instead of starting 2008 with some bubbly orgy of prosecco and
lambrusco, I went home and I started work on a new short story.  This
is the only time in my 53-year lifespan that I spent New Years' Eve
working.

And you know, I think I may be better off for it.  Here in Italy, I
learn something new every day.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #3 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 08 07:08

    
I visited your blog and saw the Torino cancellation post
(http://blog.wired.com/sterling/2007/12/torino-suddenly.html), but what
caught my eye was the later post of the Hollywood Church of Religious
Science marquee
(http://blog.wired.com/sterling/2007/12/another-spectac.html), which
says "Nothing changes if nothing changes," which you call "another
spectacular insight into 2008."

What should change in 2008, and what critical changes can we actually
expect, from your perspective?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #4 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 08 08:13

    
Well, it's an American election year.  At the far-away end of it,
anyhow.

I don't doubt we'll see a few 'critical changes' in 2008, but I'd be
guessing they don't arrive through any power-player's focussed intent.
They will be dreaded changes that are predicted, and watched in detail,
and impossible to avert.

 The political and economic landscape in 2008 is full of spinning,
tottering Chinese plates poised on tall pool-cues.  Wild-card stuff
like currency collapses and international financial panics and loose
Pakistani nukes.

I wouldn't have guessed this, but in 2008 it looks like even Al Qaeda
has finally lost its dance-beat.  They used to kill whole airliners and
embassies and dance clubs and skyscrapers full of aliens and
unbelievers.  They had the world set on its ear.  

But if you look at what they're up to lately, they're almost entirely
obsessed with killing Sunni Moslems nowadays.  They're killing so many
Sunni Moslems that all the other parties who used to enthuse so about
killing Sunni Moslems are losing interest.  Because if Al Qaeda
slaughters crowds of Sunni worshippers in Sunni mosques on major Sunni
holidays, what can the rest of us do to keep up?

I'm sure that, in the jehadi camps, there's a lot of backpatting this
holiday season over getting a Lion of the Resistance to liquidate
Benazir Bhutto.  Still: wouldn't it have been vastly more effective to
assassinate, say, Angela Merkel the female Chancellor of Germany? Or
kill Putin, maybe?  They used to think so big! 

If Angela Merkel had been killed by a suicide bomber the Europeans
would be in fullscale antiterror lockdown right now.  Whereas
destabilizing Pakistan is like.... it's doable, but what gives there? 
Millions of pious Moslems die in a civil war in the birthplace of the
Taliban?  And this advances the general cause of piety in what way,
exactly?

Pakistan could very easily smash to bloody pieces in 2008.  If it
does, nobody anywhere is gonna try and stitch Pakistan back together. 
Pakistan has a bigger population than Russia.  It is just too big for
any of the other power-players to handle.  So if it ignites, it'll
burn.

So they'll just blow up the local missile sites (if they can), and
then watch in grim disbelief.  

Some people still think that there's an "Islamo-fascist tyranny"
somewhere that hates our freedoms and can organize Islam-dom into a
coherent fascist state...  There's just no way.  Al Qaeda and the
Taliban aren't true "fascists." Fascists can at least make trains run
on time.  Even Communists were better-organized.   The mujihadeen have
no organized army and no industrial policy and they don't know where to
find any.  Because God was supposed to handle all that for them. 
You're supposed to die nobly in a crowd of unwitting strangers, and
then God's supposed to make that all better.  That's the big plan.

But when you blow up the china shop, God doesn't reassemble the plates
for you.  Being faith-based doesn't trump reality.

It's pretty good news that Al Qaeda is getting tired and losing its
charisma.  They've held center stage more than long enough.  

I think "we" in the largest sense, planetary civilization, world
culture or whatever, we're closer to a consensus idea of futurity than
it's been since, say, 1997.  It's a green futurity.  People don't like
it much, but they know it's coming anyway.

Ten years ago, there was a little Belle Epoque era of good feeling
there when the "Washington Consensus" held its sway... and the thought
among opinion-makers of the time was, you know, let the dot-com Long
Boomers run that show.    Everybody knew that what they were saying and
doing didn't make much sense -- but at least there was plenty of pie
there for the Formerly Free World.

Now the Americans have clearly lost the thread... the Americans are
really just horribly out of it, they're like some giant fundie Brazil,
nobody takes their pronunciamentos seriously or believes a word they
say... Whereas the world is much more seriously global now.  China and
India are real players, they're part of the show and they matter. 

  Serious-minded people everywhere do know they have to deal with the
resource crisis and the climate crisis.  Becaus the world-machine's
backfiring and puffing smoke.  Joe and Jane Sixpack are looking at
four-dollar milk and five-dollar gas.  It's hurting and it's scary and
there's no way out of it but through it.

Everybody's reluctant to budge because they sense, probably correctly,
that they have to wade through a torrent of mud, blood sweat and
tears.  Maybe, then, they emerge into the relatively sunlit uplands of
something closer to sustainability.  

So: I don't expect too much to happen in 2008: except for that
intensified smell of burning as people's feet are held to the fire.  
"Nothing changes if nothing changes." But if nothing changes, then more
and more china is going to flat-out shatter and break.

THEN they'll move.  If they see somebody making money at it, they
might move pretty fast.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #5 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 08 11:59

    
I suppose regime change in the U.S. could improve its standing and
influence in the world community, but who will lead in the 21st
Century? I suppose New York and Los Angeles will seem quaint, somewhat
tired communities next to Shanghai, Moscow, and Dubai?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #6 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 08 06:46

    
I'd be guessing there's a pretty good chance that cities will lead.

Nation-states seem bewildered by the contemporary political and
economic climate.  Still, there are lots of urban areas that seem
lively.  New York looks downright dynamic.  There are a lot of words to
describe Los Angeles, but "quaint" certainly isn't one of them. 

  Here in Italy the national government is the despair of the populace
(to judge by the press coverage), but Torino's got a lot going on as
an urban center.  They're not going to lead in national politics -- at
least, I don't *think* so -- but in terms of grabbing an aging, vacant,
screwed-up industrial infrastructure and retrofitting it successfully
for new conditions, Torino really *does* lead.  Torino's full of
opportunity.

I don't think anybody wants to become a Chinese Communist any more --
except for a few cocaine-crazed Maoist weirdos in the Andes -- but
there really does seem to be a Chinese model-of-development now.  In
the Balkans, in Europe, you can see it at work.  It's very
street-level, very under-the-legal-radar -- it comes out of car trunks
and off the backs of bicycles, and the labels are dodgy and its all
sold for the "china-price."

Torino's got the biggest outdoor market in Europe, a place called the
"Porta Palazzo" -- Chinese, Rumanian emigres, Arabs, a few Nigerians
and Eritreans and such... the economic vitality there is awesome. 
Turin is a chilly, Alpine-foothill kind of place... and there are a lot
of poor people here, mostly the emigres... yet *nobody is cold.*
Nobody's blue and shivering.   Because they're all warmly dressed, in
new, cheap, Chinese clothes.  Boots, hats, gloves, mufflers, they're
crazily cheap.

Ragged clothes were the signature of poverty for centuries.  That
former reality is just gone now.  The fancier clothes here are also
made in China, but with more IP protection.  I don't know if that's
"leadership" -- but it sure is transformative.

My guess is that, among your list, Dubai has got the best chance to be
 called "quaint" one of these years.  It's built on oil and
autocracy.... its got a phantom-like, Fatehpur Sikri feeling to it,
like a Las Vegas desert dream.  Maybe it can thrive as an offshore
colony for India.  In much the way that, say, Vegas seems really sexy
and sophisticated to someone from Omaha.

We expect somebody to "lead" by acting all conventionally leaderlike
-- Putin "leads."  Sarkozy would like to "lead."  Bush imagines that he
"leads."  But it's entirely unclear where these guys think they're
leading people: they lack much in the way of any explicit societal
vision, and if they made that explicit, I don't think people would much
want to live there.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #7 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 08 12:43

    
Conspiracy theories abound; I hear occasional theories about shadow
governments and stealthy wealthocracies that are engineering a future
that works for them, if for no one else. The economic reality you
describe sounds very laissez-faire, decentralized, and out of control
(in the Kevin Kelly sense). Given the "bewilderment" of nation-states
that you describe, are we evolving away from monolithic government
entities? What about the scattered pockets of already-built WMDs,
organized and disorganized armies, other instruments of lethal force?
And where are powerful corporations in this? Are they, too, bewildered?
Are we going to see a massive unraveling of force in the world,
similar to the unraveling of the USSR, if only because no entity can
afford to pay the increasing costs of control?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #8 of 116: What is going to amuse our bouches now? (bumbaugh) Wed 2 Jan 08 13:19

    
Is this anticipated "leadership of the cities" the herald of the decline of
the nation state? Or has that ship sailed?

(And, for those following along on the World Wide Web: by e-mailing the
hosts at inkwell@well.com you, too can join the conversation with Bruce
Sterling on the state of the world.)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #9 of 116: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Wed 2 Jan 08 14:11

    
Hey Bruce.

You've lived in Europe for a few years now, and this year you moved to a 
genuine "old Europe" EU/NATO country. How has that shifted your view of 
The Future?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #10 of 116: Cogito, Ergo Spero (robertflink) Wed 2 Jan 08 15:27

    
Any comment on the affect of the growing entertainment (broadly
considered) industry in 2008?  I mean something other than increased
obesity due to lack of exercise.  Perhaps a profusion of imagination?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #11 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Wed 2 Jan 08 18:43

    
This, in <4>, stood out for me...
> I think "we" in the largest sense, planetary civilization, world
> culture or whatever, we're closer to a consensus idea of futurity than
> it's been since, say, 1997.  It's a green futurity.  People don't like
> it much, but they know it's coming anyway.

What's up with people not liking a green future?  Are they equating it 
with deprivation?  Do they imagine themselves raising their own food with
shovels and short-handled hoes?  Are they thinking about gas rationing?  
Water rationing?

Whatever happened to the notion that a green future might be more fun?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #12 of 116: QUESTION FROM DEAN LOOMIS (davadam) Wed 2 Jan 08 22:39

    
Dean Loomis writes:

Your latest novel, The Zenith Angle, seemed to me to be a regular
Clancyesque techno-thriller, with similar chances at best-sellerdom.  
William Gibson, writing stuff set in the recent past, has actually
made it on to the NY Times' list for his most recent two efforts.  The
Nebula Awards seem to be dominated by fantasy rather than SF.  The
Sci-Fi Channel on TV shows Extreme Championship Wrestling. Mainstream
authors like Cormac McCarthy write books that would not raise an
eyebrow if included in SF collections. Gibson has been quoted as saying
that the critical event of the "technological singularity", where the
future 
becomes unforeseeable, has already been passed.   Nobody would have 
believed that the fabled "Northwest passage" ice-free from the
Atlantic to the Pacific was a realistic event, yet it was there last
summer.  Is there any point to SF as something to be taken seriously
rather than as a branch of the "young adult" section of the bookstore?

Cheers,
- Dean
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #13 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 08 06:02

    
*Conspiracy theories are for saps.  I mean, yeah, the Cheney energy
camp that decided to logjam Kyoto and invade Iraq was a "conspiracy,"
but that's not a "theory."


*On to the commentary:

This, in <4>, stood out for me...
> I think "we" in the largest sense, planetary civilization, world
> culture or whatever, we're closer to a consensus idea of futurity
than
> it's been since, say, 1997.  It's a green futurity.  People don't
like
> it much, but they know it's coming anyway.

What's up with people not liking a green future?  Are they equating it

with deprivation? 

*Yes.  That, and a vast, thick, ear-buzzing swarm of regulatory
inspectors.

 Do they imagine themselves raising their own food with
shovels and short-handled hoes?

*If they can still afford a suburban back yard, yeah.  

  Are they thinking about gas rationing?  

*That'll be fun.  Actually, what happens nowadays is that
guys like Putin just shut off the natural gas lines, cunningly
timing that for maximum political impact.  You can see guys
like Chavez and Ahmedinajad giving each other medals while
the plan to crash the dollar... they're still using faxes,
those oil boys, but when they mull over what Enron did
to Silicon Valley back when Bush loved them, wow, the
sky's gotta be the limit.

Water rationing?

*You got Atlanta, you got Australia...  if it doesn't rain,
what else do you do?

Whatever happened to the notion that a green future might be more fun?
  
*Well, green would be a LOT more fun in that green actually is a
future, but the truth on the ground is that things are a lot browner
than they looked.  No ice in the Arctic in *five years*?!

http://climateprogress.org/2007/12/12/an-ice-free-arctic-by-2013/

*Five years?  There's just no way to cakewalk past a specter like
that.  That's not gonna be any fun.

*On the plus side, I'm finding it kinda fun to be in a fossil-fuel
car capital that's trying so hard to install trolleys and trains.  For
a science fiction writer, a lot more "fun" to imagine a green future
than it is to live in a green present; a green present is mundane.  The
victory condition isn't a life when green is 'fun.'  The victory
condition is a world where green is all there is. Where brown is gone.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #14 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 08 06:17

    
"Is this anticipated "leadership of the cities" the herald of the
decline of the nation state? Or has that ship sailed?"

*People have been talking about the twilight of national sovereignty
for as long as I can remember.  The thing that's different now is those
big, scary, non-integrating Gap patches where the Westphalian deal is
just frankly dead.  Beyond help.  Failed states, non-states.  People
are getting used to failed states, or fake hollow-states.  They are
starting to talk seriously about a "failed globe."

*The classic idea was that states would bow the knee to a new global
order, but what if that's even more screwed-up than a nation-state? 
What then?

*Well, there's nothing inherent about nations as an organizing
principle.  Nations could go away.  Global government, that's never
existed. It's a sci-fi idea.

*It's kinda hard to imagine *cities* going away, though, short of a
massive population crash.  All the major cities in the Balkans are
still there, even though the "nations" they conjure up have changed
their flags, passports and currencies five or six times.

*New York has a future.  Chicago has a future.  San Francisco is
dynamic.  Any place called a 'creative class city" is very attractive. 
  Life in American heartland Red States is cheerless and imperilled
and getting worse...  I've been to places where nations lose their
primary loyalties... in a globalized world, they just... leach out.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #15 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 08 06:23

    
Is there any point to SF as something to be taken seriously
rather than as a branch of the "young adult" section of the bookstore?

*Well, not a "genre," as some sacred aisle in the bookstore where
you're supposed to feel all "serious..."  This question looks archaic
to me.  Do you actually still go to bookstores?  You don't just Amazon
stuff?

*I take works of fiction seriously when they deal seriously with
serious issues.  I think that's a matter of how things work out on the
page.  It's not a matter of genre or marketing, if it ever was.   It
isn't the New York Times bestseller list that validates SPOOK COUNTRY. 
It's more the sensibility that book invokes, some author trying really
hard to battle with contemporary shadows.  It reads like Soviet
dissident literature, almost.  Some of that stuff was quite whimsical
and fantastic, yet it also felt about as serious as fiction is able to
get.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #16 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 08 06:57

    
Here's a question Stefan Jones emailed to me...

Twenty years ago, it  seemed only  Whole Earth Review readers were 
getting their organic hemp panties in a knot about sustainability and
lifestyle footprints. Conservative pundits who needed fodder for an
overdue column could sneer at Paul Erlich for losing that bet about
commodity prices.

Now the whole sustainability thing has gotten legit, amazingly fast.
High scrap metal prices are driving  tweakers to steal aluminum guard
rails, catalytic converters, and the bronze plaques on war memorials.
I've been in houses where every light socket has a wee florescent
spiral.

Do you think we can keep up the new frugality thing? (We meaning
Americans of the USAin variety.) Put another way, do we have it in us
to give up the fat and happy lifestyle for something better insulated 
and harder to chew?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #17 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 08 07:21

    
Riffing myself on some of Bruce's responses - more comments and
question:

*Conspiracy theories are for saps.  I mean, yeah, the Cheney energy
camp that decided to logjam Kyoto and invade Iraq was a "conspiracy,"
but that's not a "theory."

jonl> In the FringeWare years we played with conspiracy theories as
objets d'art. When I realized that some of our adherents were not in
the least ironic, that they were true believers, I felt a chill... but
it was interesting to think how their world-views developed from an
attempt to build a reality around limited facts, with limited
understanding.  Actual conspiracies have significant social and
political overhead and are practically impossible to hold together in a
world where even simple partnerships tend to fall apart.  How do we
refocus energies currently devoted to conspiracy thinking, and conspire
to survive?

 Do they imagine themselves raising their own food with
shovels and short-handled hoes?

*If they can still afford a suburban back yard, yeah.  

jonl> In Austin, there's a movement to farm every available bit of
land.  For instance, YouthLaunch has its "Urban Roots" program with a
vision for "the urban farm" managed by kids 14-18:
http://www.youthlaunch.org/programs/urbanroots.php

"Is this anticipated "leadership of the cities" the herald of the
decline of the nation state? Or has that ship sailed?"

.
.
.

*Well, there's nothing inherent about nations as an organizing
principle.  Nations could go away.  Global government, that's never
existed. It's a sci-fi idea.

*It's kinda hard to imagine *cities* going away, though, short of a
massive population crash.  All the major cities in the Balkans are
still there, even though the "nations" they conjure up have changed
their flags, passports and currencies five or six times.

jonl> I think it's more a question whether we see increasing
decentralization - the forms of organization that follow might be
urban, rural, whatever makes sense. Maybe counties and provinces are
the basic level of organization. Does the nation-state go away? Or does
it just become less relevant? And, as I asked before, what do we do
with the various national repositories of WMD?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #18 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Thu 3 Jan 08 07:51

    
> *Well, green would be a LOT more fun in that green actually is a
> future, but the truth on the ground is that things are a lot browner
> than they looked.

We're awfully late off the starting line.  If we'd read the writing on the 
wall back in the 60s, and taken it seriously, like a looming imperative 
rather than a pipe dream, the world would be greener today, and the way 
forward much clearer.

As it is, we've done our best to ignore and deny that there might be any
serious problems with business as usual, and so we still find ourselves
heavily dependent on oil, much of it imported, including for food
production, so dependent that it's difficult to imagine how to get from
where we've blundered to that green future without going through a crash
that brings the whole machine to a stop.

Meanwhile, technology continues to progress and offer pieces to the puzzle
of how to proceed, pieces we'll need to augment with changes in the way we
do things for them to make much of a difference.

For example, just about everybody realizes that dependence on oil for food 
production is a big vulnerability, so the question arises how else we might 
fuel the tractors, and people are hard at work on developments like 
cellulosic ethanol, which is a good thing in itself, but why aren't we 
hearing about substituting electric motors and photovoltaic arrays?  So 
maybe it would either mean dragging a power cable or building tractors like 
hay wagons, with a large surface area, so what?  Wouldn't either of those 
be far better than burning diesel refined from petroleum that had been 
pumped out of the ground thousands of miles away?

The longer and harder we cling to business as usual, the worse the crash is 
going to be, when it comes.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #19 of 116: Peter Hart-Davis (bumbaugh) Thu 3 Jan 08 08:36

    
from off-Well:


Hi There

If I may contribute.

Once again an extremely interesting discussion.  Thank You.

"Nation-states seem bewildered by the contemporary political and economic
climate."  A fine turn of phrase, which I do agree, seems to sum up
Nation-state's response to present global conditions.  Even those
Nation-states which appear to be in the pound seats at the moment.

Over the last few weeks I have noticed a number of references online to the
'four horsemen of the apocalypse' in discussions on 'the contemporary
political and economic climate' and out of the corner of ones eyes one sees
the flickering of signs such as food shortages, H5N1, Pakistan or saber
rattling about Venezuela or Iran.

Could it be that the time is running out for conventional leadership to
ride to the rescue and if so anybody have any ideas on what unconventional
leadership might be?

Peter
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #20 of 116: Henry Schroy (hankschroy) Thu 3 Jan 08 11:07

    
* Seems like the mindset that easily grabs on to conspiracy theories
and clings to them like religion isn't too different from
scripture-thumping fanatics.  Both don't seem to allow much space for
rational discussion and verifiable evidence to seep in.

* With all the talk about the looming collapse of the U.S. Dollar, I
was reminded of WG's "SPOOK COUNTRY" where he talks about the 100 bill
being the de facto currency of the worldwide underground economy. 
Seems like nowadays there would be a better choice for such a standard
! (if this were in fact true.)

* Having lived in New York for 16 years now, I like the idea that
cities are and will become more and more sovereign entities - every New
Yorker knows that New York ain't America...  

* There was also mention of Atlanta, another city that I've lived in,
and Australia, as part of a comment about resource scarcity.  What
about Australia?  It seems like there is much more of a culture of
forward-thinking environmentalism there, even if the past x many years
have been burdened by a Bush-lovin' conservative government.  Isn't
there a green future for those down under?  And isn't Sydney one of
those great cities of the future?

* Any thoughts on the implications of the huge oil reservoir off of
Brazil's coast?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #21 of 116: John Roberts (bumbaugh) Thu 3 Jan 08 12:37

    
John Roberts writes:


(From off-Well)

Hi, Gang!

Mind if I add a pinch of something to this punch-bowl?

What spooks me about our future isn't so much the idea of the Four Horsemen
of the Apocalypse bearing down upon us with fistfuls of H5N1, pricey milk,
loose nukes, failed political orders and what-have-you. Nor am I
particularly bothered by the inability of science fiction writers to
correctly guess how tech will affect our future.

Most of us grew up being spoon-fed The Apocalypse, whether it involved
silly A-Bomb Survival Drills ("Ok, Class, now place your books over your
heads, your heads between your legs... and kiss your asses g'bye..."), or
your friendly neighborhood Christian Fundamentalist, ("It's written in The
Book that all Hell's gonna break loose. God ain't sayin' exactly which day,
but you'll sure know when it happens..."), or simply hearing President
Reagan intone --I paraphrase, here-- "This current crop of youngsters may
very well survive -- to see the End Of Days...", etc. Failed political
orders?  Man, I was born in '74. Y'know, the year of Nixon's Greatest
Achievement (getting ridden out on a rail:)). What political order? After a
few decades (Centuries?) of this sort of thing, is

it any wonder that people can't seem to agree on a survival strategy when
*actual* problems rear their heads? Who can keep up with it all?

There's no question that we have some serious challenges ahead. What spooks
me most is that quite a sizable chunk of the civilized world seems to have
given up on even trying to envision the future at all. Why bother, when it
most likely ends in fire or ice? What if instead of death by
animal-to-human transmission of plague (ooh, I really hope it won't be
pig-to-human; rhinitis would suck!) we find ourselves faced with all sorts
of other Apocalyptic scenarios not mentioned in The Book: massive credit
card debts piling up, millions of sub-prime loan home foreclosures, peak
oil, etc.?

Could it be that many of our troubles are rooted in Apocalyptic thinking?
Mightn't it be necessary for us to bust a cap in those tired old "End of
Days" horses before the bulk of the civilized world can become more forward
thinking?

It seems obvious that conventional political, business and religious
leaders are not up to the task of solving our biggest future problems. One
major reason for this is that the most successful of them are more
opportunistic than visionary. The human equivalent of hammer-head sharks,
happy to bite into any old thing they bump into, but not particularly
interested in anything else.

You  wanna know who I think has the stuff to lead us into the future?

Sci-Fi writers. Not because they are always right about the future, (ex:
E.E. Doc Smith wasn't so far off, was he? I mean, we all know somebody
who's in training to become a Lensman, right?), but because the chief value
of Sci-Fi has more to do with it's ability to help us envision *any kind of
a future*, than actually making realistic predictions.

Are you game, Mr Sterling?

--JR
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #22 of 116: pardon my amygdala (murffy) Thu 3 Jan 08 13:07

    
>Could it be that many of our troubles are rooted in
>Apocalyptic thinking?

It does seem like there are a lot of people who are sort of tapping
their toes and checking their watches for that inevitable doomsday they
know is just around the corner. Doomsday prognostications and dire
scenarios seem to be a feature of the human condition. The nature of
someone's particular doomsday appears to depend largely on their
ideological stripes. Another feature is that when doomsday doesn't
occur as expected, the non-occurance doesn't feedback in such a way as
to make people question the kinds of thinking that lead to their
doomsday predictions. They go on making them.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #23 of 116: COMMENT FROM MORGAN KNAPP (davadam) Thu 3 Jan 08 20:49

    
From off-WELL:

So what do you think of the hydrogen breakthroughs, the aluminum in
water catalyst, and the sonic transponder on vials of seawater.

Do you feel this has the necessary low-tech edge to break through the
conglomerate hold on isolated people and towns, to allow self
sufficency, and maybe save the last of the trees from firewood?

A mom and pop hydro stand along the road to Darfur sounds pretty damn
promising to me. !

Morganism
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #24 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 08 02:46

    
"You  wanna know who I think has the stuff to lead us into the future?

Sci-Fi writers."

*Yeah, Newt Gingrich thought that. Gingrich is a science fiction
writer.

*Y'know, you don't wanna go there.  Not really.  Science fiction
writers are not as bad as apocalyptic conspiracy theorists (except for
the ones who ARE apocalyptic conspiracy theorists), but they're not the
kinds of personalities you actually want in positions of power and
authority.  Science fiction writers like amazing and wonderful and
freaky and dreadful stuff.  They get bored with the dull stuff, like
making sure your kids have shoes and plumbing and your population has
civil rights.  Quite commonly their OWN kids don't have shoes and
plumbing.  Like in the lightbulb joke:

Q.  How many science fiction writers does it take to change a
lightbulb?

A.  None; their wives do it for them.

Actually there's a whole series of those.

Q. How many feminist science fiction writers does it take to change a
lightbulb?
A.  That's not funny.

Q. How many literary science fiction writers does it take to change a
lightbulb?
A.  Never mind the technical details; I want to know how he feels
about it...

I could go on.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #25 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 08 03:07

    
This is a rather doomy conversation... it has to be, because that
definitely suits the period, it reflects the facts on the ground... 
but one of the ways to escape a sense of learned-helplessness is to
postulate the opposite.

Like:  imagine a world in which Bush was one of America's greatest
presidents.  He was still Bush, believing everything he believes, but
he was a statesman whose vision had overwhelmed his critics.

For instance:  Imagine that Iraq had been brimming over with nerve
gas, secret missiles and even some homemade nuclear devices.  Every
grim thing that noted RAND futurist Donald Rumsfeld (remember him?)
belived about the Iraq situation was keenly prescient and accurate. 
So a pre-emptive invasion was completely justified; even brilliant. 

We'd still be in Iraq right now.  EVERYBODY would be in Iraq right
now.  The Coalition of the Willing would probably be in Iran, too, and
aiming for Pakistan.  There would be a military draft, and a world war
of sorts, but what other choice would we have?  Bush would be a
military hero who had saved us from a nuclear Pearl Harbor.

Imagine that the destruction of the middle class, the K Street
strategy and crazy income disparities had led to a brilliantly solid
American economy.   It was Republican, yet technically innovative, with
a sound dollar, a government surplus, Chinese-style ten percent GDP
rates, and stock market boom conservatively based on radically improved
productivity and genuine prosperity... Bushnomics would rule the
world.

Imagine that the Christian Right set America's social policies, and
that they were Christian ladies and gentlemen.  Imagine that they had
so much moral authority through their good works and spiritual power
that one felt ashamed in combatting them.  They were not demagogic
Elmer Gantrys who bashed gays, ambushed women and ruined the nation...
instead, wherever their kindly shadow fell, the hungry were fed and
housed, sinners were rehabilitated and made active members of the
community, drug abuse was abandoned in favor of prayer, Martin Luther
King's southern baptist dream vision was destroying the scourge of
racism from sea to shining sea... The Culture War would be all over;
the USA would be a theocratic state.

But none of that happened.  Instead, we have what we have.  And the
people who voted for that -- Joe and Jane NASCAR, with their
variable-rate mortgages and their cousin in the Army -- man are they
ever gonna catch it in the neck.  The closet is full of skeletons, and
that's bad, but the skeletons are there for good reasons; they're all
skeletons of rotten policies that died horribly and deserved to die.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #26 of 116: What is going to amuse our bouches now? (bumbaugh) Fri 4 Jan 08 05:12

    
You've got some other queries queued, but that's never stopped me:

Cities leading the way, surviving in the face of national and international
turmoil -- is that new kid of ad hocracy, or is that really the same as what
we've had?

And, pure predict-the-future bait: what's going to happen in China during
and around the Olympics? What follows in the wake?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #27 of 116: Cogito, Ergo Spero (robertflink) Fri 4 Jan 08 06:44

    
Bruce, I like the approach you used in post #25.  Among other things,
it brings to light the idea that the plans and deliberate actions of
the past and present are virtually determinate of the future.  

Is there a human need to believe that the levers of existence are
substantially in our hands and/or that we can divine the pattern in
history?  IMHO, indulging such belief too much is a problematic course.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #28 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 08 07:12

    
I'm finding it hard to go there (#25), but I suppose you've got a
start on your own version of _Man in the High Castle_.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #29 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Fri 4 Jan 08 09:37

    
> apocalyptic thinking and language

I repent my use of the word "crash".  The reality is more likely to
resenble a car that starts spouting steam from under the hood, leaving
enough time to pull it onto the shoulder before it comes to a complete
stop, and which, after cooling off and refilling the radiator, may still be
good for a mile at a time, with long rests in between - very inconvenient,
but not insurmountable.

The big looming reality is the inexorably increasing price of oil.  New
discoveries and known reserves that formerly were too expensive to exploit
can slow that down some, but probably not turn it around.

Oil is important not only because it's a relatively abundant, concentrated
source of energy but because there's a huge infrastructure built up around
it and its derivatives, which are mostly liquid and require insignificant
pressurization, if any at all.  What that infrastructure can accomodate
with little modification skews the playing field for replacement fuels,
making ethanol look relatively easy and hydrogen look relatively difficult.
Nevertheless, hydrogen is gaining ground as a sort of energy currency.

With regard to the stability of society, all other issues pale by
comparison with the rising price of oil, and a sustainable solution (set 
of solutions, really) that guarantees abundant energy supplies at the
equivalent of $3-$5 per gallon of gasoline will go a long way to quiet
apocalyptic predictions.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #30 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Fri 4 Jan 08 09:50

    
Yup. I read James Howard Kunstler's "The Long Emergency," which
addresses precisely that point, and found it quite convincing.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #31 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Fri 4 Jan 08 10:19

    
> And, pure predict-the-future bait: what's going to happen in 
> China during and around the Olympics? What follows in the wake?

I dunno. But what would have happened if Those Unpleasant People drove
aeroplanes into Chinese tall towers?


I've not yet heard any mention of sex, babies and magic. Even people
who know better talk about babies as "miracles" or the more
scientificalish "miracle of birth". 7,000,000,000 consumers of
petroleum products is the (literal) denominator.

Causal coupling between babies, poverty, education, state/religious
sexism etc is known, not that there's even much motion on it these
days. But it seems such a huge factor to be left out...

I doubt there's any simple relationship to population and the rest of
the system, but it's gotta be a huge factor.


PS: Conspiracies and doomsdays (can you have more than one?): They
sure are exciting, easy exits. Some things ("hydrogen power") are de
facto conspiracies, in that they are gross oversimplifications, and
their success/revelation hinges on a hidden fact (a cost-free lever to
break H and O bonds) that Powers That Be suppress (as opposed to it not
existing).

Both also let the utterer off the hook for any action at all, as it's
either to no avail or will come out in the wash.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #32 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Fri 4 Jan 08 11:02

    
<With regard to the stability of society, all other issues pale by
comparison with the rising price of oil>

Oil is huge, yes, (as is overpopulation), but it's amazing to me how
the nuclear threat has been repressed by comparison.  Its omnipresent
danger has become too huge a specter for most people to think about on
a daily basis. Except for those occasions where North Korea needs
strong-arming, or Iran's bluff called, the issue is largely relegated
to the realm of the unimaginable.  Compared to the early 60s and the
stores-of-soda-crackers-in-a-bomb-shelter days of "Dr. Strangelove", we
have largely stopped imagining its ugly possibilities.

On the other hand, the hope for humanity has always derived from our
capacity to adapt to changing circumstances.  Less oil and higher
prices for petroleum products will bring economically feasible
alternatives to the forefront.  Localized farmers markets could sell,
not just specialized produce, but more area staples in affordable bulk.
Fresh Chilean strawberries in December in Vancouver will likely cost
too much, so Northwest potatoes and wheat, etc. would be more likely to
keep that city from starving.  The products in grocery stores will
favor regional fare if transportation costs become too high.  The era
of the long automobile commute and the single family dwelling will be
curtailed in North America. 

In emergency situations, people tend to come together.  School
cafeterias would be natural soup kitchens. Barter prevails when
currencies collapse.  This is where I would imagine the City-State to
assert order in the face of anarchy and the Nation-State to be more
irrelevant. The efficiencies of globalization will still be applicable
for those items that can withstand higher shipping costs, but the wild
card is whether political systems will continue to allow the free flow
of goods.


Or will it go completely the other way with information systems
allowing larger governmental systems to control people on ever larger
scales?  Would such big systems of governance be the only viable way to
control large scale industrial pollution and continued erosion of the
global environment? Do we need large scale governmental controls to
counter the downside of the feudalism that might proliferate with the
ascendance of the City-State?

What will it be, Bruce?  Increased centralization or decentralization
in the future, or some weird hybrid of both? Will the "collapse" be
incremental or catastrophic?  Is it too late to avert
economic/environmental/political "collapse"? What does the crystal ball
say?

Thanks for taking the time to engage The Well/Inkwell with this
thought-provoking conversation, BTW.      
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #33 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 08 11:21

    
(A tip of the hat and big welcome to Tom Jennings - long time, no
see!)

I hear that overpopulation is less of an issue, in that population has
become relatively stable and may even be decreasing. I'm more
concerned with the growing competition for resources as other economies
scale up and hope to extend the US-style excessive standard of living
- I can't help but think we'll see more wars, perhaps a few nuclear
hits. 

High and increasing cost of oil probably isn't a bad thing, because
the increases create a sense of urgency that feeds development of
potential energy alternatives, as well as higher adoption of
conservation/energy efficiency measures.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #34 of 116: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Fri 4 Jan 08 11:43

    
It's way too easy to slip into eschatological discursions. A couple of years
back, I came up with a term for the seductive pleasure of imagining the end
of the world: apocaphilia. It runs thick in the blood of Hollywood
moviemakers, and -- much to my dismay -- of corporate planners.

One of the things I've long admired about <bruces> is his rejection of
apocaphilia -- not in the sense of being a cyberpollyanna sunshine thinker,
but in recognizing that options exist and choices matter, even in the
bleakest of landscapes.

The need, at the moment, isn't to beat our breasts at how horribly we've
screwed up, but to redouble our efforts to figure out how to get out of this
mess.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #35 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Fri 4 Jan 08 19:16

    
> <32> Less oil and higher prices for petroleum products will bring 
> economically feasible alternatives to the forefront.

> <33> High and increasing cost of oil probably isn't a bad thing, 
> because the increases create a sense of urgency that feeds 
> development of potential energy alternatives, as well as higher 
> adoption of conservation/energy efficiency measures.

That's certainly beginning to happen, particularly with regard to
electrical generation, and research into alternative fuels, but I don't
think the average wo/man on the street yet has any sense for how high
prices have to go before being capped by the availability of alternative
sources/supplies, nor any confidence that these will take up the slack as
rapidly as oil production dwindles.  It hasn't helped that the increased
production of ethanol for use as fuel has driven up the price of grain.

When people can see it happening, and have a sense for what the cost of
energy will be when the conversion to renewable sources is substantially
complete and the situation has stabilized, then maybe they won't be quite
so ready to support yet another war to secure access to whatever oil
remains in the ground.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #36 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Fri 4 Jan 08 23:02

    
> One of the things I've long admired about <bruces> is his rejection
of
> apocaphilia -- not in the sense of being a cyberpollyanna sunshine
thinker,
> but in recognizing that options exist and choices matter, even in
the
> bleakest of landscapes.

Yes, and a welcome breeze it is. 

So Bruce, what do you think the Chinese would do if someone whacked
them hard?


re: energy; a new system-think is required... looking for the magic
fuel (alcohol, H2, hemp, ...) is missing the point that overconsumption
itself is the problem, there isn't a thing we can continue to
over-consume that's less harmful. 

Capitalism, socialism, ideologies are part of the problem.  So maybe
medicine, radio spectrum, ocean beaches, ... should be
nationalized/socialized; electronics, clothing, ... let the
capitalistas run amok. Atmospheric carbon, toxic shit inna ocean --
global control backed with UN-like physical warforce. A patchwork of
problem-solving and resources, and robust inconsistencies. Ideologues
are busy making turf instead!

Funny, nukeyoular issues don't really scare me (famous last words :-).
Nuclear winter is overrated. No one but US & Russia have Pu implosion
devices, they're not cost effective and exceedingly hard to make work.
U bombs are easy, though limited to mere myratons. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #37 of 116: Thomas Armagost (silly) Sat 5 Jan 08 01:06

    <scribbled by silly Sat 5 Jan 08 01:51>
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #38 of 116: Thomas Armagost (silly) Sat 5 Jan 08 01:51

    <scribbled by silly Sat 7 Jul 12 17:17>
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #39 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 04:50

    
Well, it's rattling right along here.  Good thing I just went out and
had a couple of bicerin (national coffee drink of Torino).

The reason people aren't panicked over nuclear war now is that the
guys who run nation-states no longer consider it in their interest to
incinerate trading-partners.  Even if you're General Jack D. Ripper,
you can't incinerate Russia; that's where the oil and gas are.  And Red
China?  They supply Wal-Mart; no China, no Christmas.

The actual likelihood of one or two nuclear detonations is pretty high
and getting higher, but the only places likely to receive whole
broadsides of nuclear weapons are easy to number: Pakistan (from
India), Iran (from Israel) and North Korea (from everybody).  

Americans could wake up tomorrow and find Washington or New York
turned by black glass. It won't be a horde of over-the-pole ICBMs that
wipes out civilization.  It'll be one of those black-swan things that
seem "unthinkable" and that people get used to, since there's no
choice.

"So what do you think of the hydrogen breakthroughs, the aluminum in
water catalyst, and the sonic transponder on vials of seawater."

Y'know, I've seen about a million of these miracle new-energy
solutions.  I was really interested for quite a while.  I used to
collect 'em like baseball cards.  Being a sci-fi writers, I naturally
adore the really freaky new-energy schemes, like generating electricity
from the bacterial ooze on the bottom of the ocean.

But there are good reasons that things like these lack real-world
traction.

"Oil is important not only because it's a relatively abundant,
concentrated source of energy but because there's a huge infrastructure
built up around it and its derivatives, which are mostly liquid and
require insignificant pressurization, if any at all."

*Yeah.  Like that.  You hear that?  That was the limpid sound of pure
energy-wonk.  It's great to hear that being expressed so much nowadays.
 To me that feels like the glorious day when people didn't have to
have the word "modem" explained to them any more.

*It's easy to fall into the slough of despair and think energy systems
can't ever-never change.  That isn't so.  Oil was discovered in Texas
as recently as 1900, not  the year 900 AD.  

"Peak oil" societies do not collapse like houses of cards.  Nazi
Germany was a peak oil society -- the Allies bombed the living
daylights out of their pipelines and refineries and the Nazis went on
fighting like furies.  The Soviet Union was a peak-oil society: they
were making ethanol out of wood while physically re-locating the entire
industrial base east of the Urals.   Plus the Soviets were being
bombed, invaded, starved, massively drafted, while all their brightest
lights were in gulags, and they came out of that condition as a
superpower.  Not in a "long emergency," as a superpower.  Actually
Communism pretty much *was* a long emergency -- when I read Kunstler's
predictions, and I do read them, I'm always amazed how accurately he
describes daily life in the Warsaw Pact 30 years ago.  

I wouldn't claim it's a tonic to run out of oil, but it's not an
emergency.  A climate crisis is an emergency.  And even a climate
crisis isn't all emergency everywhere all the time.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #40 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 5 Jan 08 05:12

    
Actually, running short of oil was certainly one of the major causes
of the Nazi defeat.  Certainly not the only cause, but the idea that
they simply started making synthetic oil instead and carried on with a
smile on their lips and a spring in their goose step is not correct.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #41 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 05:12

    
"We're awfully late off the starting line.  If we'd read the writing
on the  wall back in the 60s, and taken it seriously, like a looming
imperative  rather than a pipe dream, the world would be greener today,
and the way  forward much clearer."

*Boy, what an awesome opportunity to do something I do too rarely:
quote Kim Stanley Robinson.

http://bldgblog.blogspot.com/2007/12/comparative-planetology-interview-with.ht
ml

"Robinson: Well, at the end of the 1960s and through the 70s, what we
thought  and this is particularly true in architecture and design
terms  was: OK, given these new possibilities for new and different
ways of being, how do we design it? What happens in architecture? What
happens in urban design?

"As a result of these questions there came into being a big body of
utopian design literature thats now mostly obsolete and out of print,
which had no notion that the Reagan-Thatcher counter-revolution was
going to hit. Books like Progress As If Survival Mattered, Small Is
Beautiful, Muddling Toward Frugality, The Integral Urban House, Design
for the Real World, A Pattern Language, and so on. I had a whole shelf
of those books. Their tech is now mostly obsolete, superceded by more
sophisticated tech, but the ideas behind them, and the idea of
appropriate technology and alternative design: that needs to come back
big time."

*I had all those books on my shelf, too.  And yeah, their tech IS
obsolete.  And that's not a bug, that's a feature.  It's a feature of
hairshirt-green thinking.  

*It's not that Thatcher and Reagan killed green technology; Reagan and
Thatcher scarcely had an idea in their heads.  It's that this kind of
design was bad design.   If you focus "progress" squarely on
"survival," it's like rising from bed thinking,  "Boy, I better make
sure I somehow manage to get to the end of this day."  It immediately
bleaches all the whimsy and serendipity out of industrial development.

*It's stupefying to be always conscientious.  That is not how
alternative technologies and new ways of life are successfully
generated.  It's certainly not how good design happens.  Mindful design
bears the relationship to actual design that a socialist allocation
depot bears to a laboratory. 

*If you're serious about design, you can't quote Ruskin and try to
build Gothic cathedrals in your tiny arts and crafts atelier.  You've
gotta prototype stuff, fail early, fail often, and build scalability
into it so that, if you have a hit, you can actually have a big hit. A
success as large as the problem.

*If your point is to live in an ashram because you oppose materialism,
that's your prerogative, but that is not industrialism, that is
spirituality.  You could do that tomorrow.  Go ahead.  You won't be the
first to try it and you won't be the first to quit, either.

*If you think it's great to totter around breathing shallowly and
accomplishing as little as possible, you ought to go befriend somebody 
who's ninety.  Eventually, that's what you will get.  You WILL have a
very strictly delimited life where taking a hot bath is a major
enterprise.   And shortly after that you'll be dead, and there is
NOBODY so "green" as the dead.  Practically every moral virtue
delineated in those books was better accomplished by a dead person than
a live person.  

*So it was no way to live.  And nobody lived that way.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #42 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 05:19

    
"Actually, running short of oil was certainly one of the major causes
of the Nazi defeat.  Certainly not the only cause, but the idea that
they simply started making synthetic oil instead and carried on with a
smile on their lips and a spring in their goose step is not correct."


*Okey-doke, but running out of blood was an even bigger cause of the
Nazi defeat, and nobody talked much about a Peak Blood crisis.

I'll give you two Russias here; one cuts off your fossil fuels as an
act of soft-power belligerence...
http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/sport/football/european_football/article78424
7.ece

While the other Russia sends Marshal Zhukov to storm Berlin with
entire divisions of Katyusha rockets.  You can tell me which scenario
is more  sincerely worrisome.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #43 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 5 Jan 08 05:37

    
Well, yeah, running out of practically everything was a major cause of
their defeat, but either way I don't think WW II tells us much about
how well or how poorly our society would weather a peak oil crisis. 
One of the reasons is just what you suggest by your comment about
Katyusha rockets.  The real question is how adaptable or fragile
civilian institutions are to a rapid rise in the price of oil/rapid
decline in supply, not what a society engaged in total war would
experience.  Will the financial system go into cardiac arrest?  On a
mundane level, would people be able to get to work?  Would we be able
to raise sufficient quantities of food and get them to market?

Clearly, $100/barrel petroleum doesn't seem to be resulting in
societal collapse.  Presumably there is a rate of change in
price/supply that society can accommodate fairly gracefully, and no
doubt a point at which the rate of change becomes uncomfortable, and
another point at which it becomes catastrophic.

Which scenarios are most likely?  Is there anything we can do to
influence the likelihood of a better outcome -- and if so, how much
influence can we have?  What about rapidly developing economies like
India and China?  What about the possibility of exporting economies
like Mexico simply consuming all the oil they produce as they grow?

Examining the end stages of the Third Reich doesn't provide us with
much guidance.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #44 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 05:42

    
"Cities leading the way, surviving in the face of national and
international turmoil -- is that new kid of ad hocracy, or is that
really the same as what we've had?"

*That's a really good question.  Obviously cities aren't really
running things, because otherwise the Conference of Mayors would be a
bigger deal than the United Nations, but I have real problems trying to
separate "a new kind of adhocracy" from the same as what we've had.  
I think the European Union poses this theoretical problem in a
particularly pressing way.  

*I spent a lot of time just outside the border of the EU, and just
lately rather some time inside it, and that transition makes it crystal
clear that the EU is a hugely powerful entity.  But what IS it?  It's
an "empire," or at least it's definitely an "imperialistic" set-up, but
it's not a confederacy, or a triple alliance, or a Holy Roman
Empire... or even a state of any kind.  It's definitely weakening
states and strengthening cities.  

You talk to young Europeans now, they don't say "I'm going to Greece
next week."  It's destination Athens, maybe even a favorite
neighborhood in Athens...  Sometimes people even call the EU
"Brussels," and if you go to Brussels what you see is Belgium trying
really hard to disintegrate.

*It's got a flag and a currency.  The world's dullest flag and a
currency entirely devoid of human beings. Euros have nothing on them
but bridges and architectural hardware.

*The EU is a multinational regulatory trade bureaucracy.  It's pretty
damn far from an "ad hocracy" because its glacial reactions and lack of
spontaneity are legendary.  Its politics are weak, its statecraft is
weaker and its popular legitimacy is close to nonexistent, but as a
bureau, man that thing is second to none.   It's the only empire in the
history of the world that people clamor to join.

*I dunno what its future is.  There are days when I think the EU is
more likely to become Google than it is to become a state.

And, pure predict-the-future bait: what's going to happen in China
during and around the Olympics? What follows in the wake?

*Torino hosted the Olympics.  They're always complaining and moaning
here that they didn't do enough with that opportunity.  You hear a lot
of faultfinding -- the stuff built for the athletes is poorly
integrated, the new infrastructure lacks imagination, etc etc, but
hosting a successful Olympics was very obviously a tonic for the city. 
It was a watershed for them, it was cathartic.  They stopped thinking
everything was impossible and that fate had it in for them.

China's not hosting the Olympics, Beijing is.  Compared to Hong Kong
or Shanghai, Beijing has been a weird, insular place.  Cold and dusty
and forbidding and a site of massacres.  Not a party town or a global
showcase, Beijing.

But if they pull this thing off successfully, yeah, I think it could
turn their heads around.  It'll be a watershed and a catharsis and the
capital of China will look-and-feel like a global city.  "Globalism
with Chinese characteristics," but yeah, globalism.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #45 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 06:03

    
 The real question is how adaptable or fragile
civilian institutions are to a rapid rise in the price of oil/rapid
decline in supply

*I agree, but my problem with Peakists is that they're desperately
eager to prove that civilian institutions are fragile, mostly because
they're weird cranks who've never found one they like.

*If you want to understand how frail civilian institutions are, you
need to study them under conditions of great stress.  Epidemics,
storms, fires, mass evacuations, and, yeah, total war.  That's how you
know how much humanity can bear.

 not what a society engaged in total war would
experience.  Will the financial system go into cardiac arrest? 

*It might, but the financial system isn't the heart of a civilization.
 Communism went into cardiac arrest.  The GDP of Russia dropped
something like 30 percent, the whole shebang was privatized to
mobsters...  The Asian financial system went into cardiac arrest a
couple of years ago.  

 On a
mundane level, would people be able to get to work?  

*No, but when it really hits the fan people find themselves doing
other work.  Guys in the siege of Sarajevo didn't "go to work," but
they had plenty to do.

Would we be able
to raise sufficient quantities of food and get them to market?

*Cuba had a peak oil experience when the Soviets stopped shipping it. 
The average Cuban lost thirty pounds, or so I'm told.  It was a
calamity of sorts, they called it the "special period." Cuba is still
there.  

Clearly, $100/barrel petroleum doesn't seem to be resulting in
societal collapse.  

*Except in Iraq, maybe.

Presumably there is a rate of change in
price/supply that society can accommodate fairly gracefully, and no
doubt a point at which the rate of change becomes uncomfortable, and
another point at which it becomes catastrophic.

*There's also a rate of change of zero when oil is no longer consumed,
and that would be the victory condition.  So, anxiously wondering
whether a loss of oil is merely bad or catastrophic is a little
short-sighted.  Oil has to go away like whale-oil went away.

Which scenarios are most likely?  Is there anything we can do to
influence the likelihood of a better outcome -- and if so, how much
influence can we have?  

*Stop using oil.  Coal is worse, mind you.

What about rapidly developing economies like
India and China? 

*I love those guys, actually.  I'm old enough to remember
when India and China were described in terms of "lifeboat ethics."

 What about the possibility of exporting economies
like Mexico simply consuming all the oil they produce as they grow?

*Texas does that already.

Examining the end stages of the Third Reich doesn't provide us with
much guidance.

*I don't wanna come across all Mike Godwin here, but if you wanna talk
catastrophe, it's important to have a coherent understanding of
genuine historical catastrophes, not make-believe pipe-dream
catastrophes that serve to feed somebody's cornball apocaphilia.

*Or, if you wanna explore the mental space of ALL POSSIBLE
catastrophes, you can try this:

http://openthefuture.com/2006/12/an_eschatological_taxonomy.html

in which peak oil would barely register as a "class zero."
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #46 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 5 Jan 08 06:09

    
<Funny, nukeyoular issues don't really scare me (famous last words
:-).>

And this coming from a guy named <t-o-m-i-c>    ;=)


And, yes, the global paradox is interesting.  Economic interdependency
creates more incentives for peace [Japan/Germany after WWII & the Red
Chinese/Indian industrial juggernaut now].  At the same time, this
economic growth strains our global resources to the breaking point. 
Something's gotta give, (or morph).
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #47 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 5 Jan 08 06:31

    
I am indeed a weird crank with a distaste for civilian institutions. 
Or so my wife always tells me.

But I'm also genuinely interested in puzzling out the questions we're
discussing.  And one could easily flip it around and say that the
thinking of those not obsessed by peak oil is clouded by their
attachment to our current social order, when one of the lessons of
history is that sooner or later most civilizations collapse.

One can imagine the conversations in Rome: "Really, I think we're
over-reaching by messing with these Germanic tribes."  "Always with the
gloom and doom -- last week it was the Picts, now it's the Germanic
tribes!"

Of course, another lesson of history is that so far, life goes on, in
some other form.  

In any case, I think by imagining a scenario in which people wouldn't
be able to hop in their cars and get to work, you're agreeing with at
least the more sensible peak oil folks, not disagreeing with them.

If you would pull Joe or Josephine Average out of their suburban
lawyer foyer for a brief chat and say "Well, you won't be able to drive
your car to work" they'd basically view it as (to quote a phrase) the
end of the world as we know it.

And they'd basically be right.  There were the Anasazi, and later on
there were the Pueblo tribes, but from an Anasazi point of view the
drought of the 11 and 1200s brought about the collapse of civilization.

And hey, my first love is geology, so I'm definitely aware of the fact
that peak oil is small beans catastrophe-wise.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #48 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 5 Jan 08 07:07

    
<the ideas behind them, and the idea of appropriate technology and
alternative design: that needs to come back big time.">


<You've gotta prototype stuff, fail early, fail often, and build
scalability into it so that, if you have a hit, you can actually have a
big hit. A success as large as the problem.>

Bruce, who is going to fund such colossal failures more than once?

Of course we need appropriate technology (as opposed to inappropriate
ones)--and, of course, we need to explore alternative designs as
solutions to our global dilemma.  Scalability may occur in the quantum
hit-and-miss manner that you suggest, but was everything that came out
of the 60s/70s appropriate tech/ alternative design era "obsolete"?  I
hardly think so.  Your dismissive tone to this historical movement
comes across as though you've don't appreciate or take for granted many
of the transformations that resulted from that earlier activism, such
as a raised consciousness to energy conservation, healthier eating, the
manner in which we use our military resources, etc.  

The first urban recycling program, for example, started in one
bohemian neighborhood in Seattle as a small pilot program in 1975.
Recycling is now institutionally part of the "mainstream".  Recycling,
gradually, became "scalable" and is still part of the global solution. 
Everything is not an instant large-scale success. 

Are we all going to move to Arcosanti-style villages?  Maybe someday
as a reaction to catastrophe, but more than likely not.  Of course,
some of the prototypes of the earlier movement seem quaint now and,
often obsolete, but Reagan/Thatcher were NOT solution-oriented.  They
were figureheads for growth, growth, and more growth and keeping the
skids of the economy greased.  

Whether motivated by spirituality, altruism, disaffection with the
coarse consumerism of the mainstream society, or an enlightened
capitalism, at least those behind the "alternative society" movement
were looking ahead and trying to envision solutions for humanity. 

Yes, it's easy to take extreme "New Age" stereotypes and trivialize a
kind of self-centered escapism, but, Bruce, that is such a narrow look
at this movement. Even if you disagree with the philosophy of
contemporary hip ascetics, I expect that there will be more "models" on
how to live a "good life" in a scaled-back manner from this movement,
than from expecting that we can find instant "scalable" solutions as we
react on the fly to one or another societal/environmental catastrophe.
       
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #49 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 08 07:23

    
> economic growth strains our global resources to the breaking point

In 2001 I wrote an article on global warming (Being Green in 2001) for
the Bruce S.-edited issue of Whole Earth Magazine. One source of info
for that article was an interview with James White, who was director of
the Environmental Studies Program at the University of Colorado at
Boulder. Here's an exchange from that interview that I've quoted and
referred to often since:

> Jon Lebkowsky: One point that John Firor makes is that with six
billion people on earth, if everyone had the same standard of living
that we [Americans] have, there's no way that we could sustain.

> James White: Yes, that's very clear. I teach a course on energy.
That's just one of the resources that you'd need, and if you do the
calculations, we use thirty times the energy the average African does.
We use ten to fifteen times the average energy that people do in
general developing countries overall. We're 250 million, they're 6
billion people. You bring them all up to our standard of living, and
the multiplication factor for energy, for aluminum, tin, lead, all the
other resources we need is just enormous. It's probably on the order of
a hundred, or something like that - I've never done the calculation.
But there's no way that I could see that we could support six billion
consumers of the American type, or even six billion consumers of the
Western European type, and they use half the resources we do.

(http://www.weblogsky.com/works/Jim_White.html)

Jamais and I discussed this a few years later, probably 2005, but in
that discussion I referred to "our high standard of living." He argued
that it was perfectly reasonable to assume all 6 billion could have a
high standard of living, because a >>high<< standard of living doesn't
*have to be* as resource intensive as in the U.S.  The question then is
how we define a "good life" that consumes fewer resources, with
innovations like eco-balanced architecture and alternative
transportation systems. And how do we get buy-in... how do you convince
citizens of ascendant developing nations that they don't want SUVs,
suburban lifestyles, swimming pools in every back yard, etc. 

There's also the question of accumulation and hoarding of resources by
the very rich: what if you assume that general widespread scaling up
means that they have to scale down, let go of some resources? Will they
fight to hold on?  (It's been interesting to watch the Bush
administration strategy: on the one hand, draining government coffers
into wealthy corporations like Halliburton; on the other hand, nudging
the U.S. toward greater financial and resource dependence on other
countries, especially China, which seems to be buying more and more of
the U.S. - all the while arguing a case for "keeping America
safe/strong." Not meaning to get into partisan wrangling here - I'm not
saying this to be critical of one party over another, it's just what I
think I'm seeing; somebody correct me if I'm wrong.)

Mark - I'm less concerned about peak oil because I've been hanging out
with clean energy business people who are dead serious about energy
alternatives. Austin's already thought through how it'll support
pluggable hybrids, and our utility, Austin Energy, is deep into
thinking about alternative sources. We have guys all over town - all
over Texas, really - who are rethinking energy. For them, global peak
oil is opportunity. Bruce has seen this, too - we were both at a clean
tech conference in Austin that was busting the seams of the local
Hyatt.

(Scott's post slipped in while I was writing mine.)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #50 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 5 Jan 08 08:35

    
It's also true that my perceptions of peak oil are affected by my
surroundings -- a mess of clueless people buying poorly built 6,000
square-foot houses and driving 2 hours each way to work in three-ton
SUVs.  And it could be noted that you live in a medium-sized city
that's a Bohemian enclave in Texas, whereas I live in the Capital of
the Free World. ;-)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #51 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 08:53

    
"Your dismissive tone to this historical movement
comes across as though you've don't appreciate or take for granted
many of the transformations that resulted from that earlier activism,
such as a raised consciousness to energy conservation, healthier
eating, the manner in which we use our military resources, etc."


*Well, if the historical movement had actually *achieved* those
things, as opposed to preaching about 'em, I'd be all reverential.  No,
I wouldn't be all reverential, I frankly don't care, but look: 
 
*"a raised consciousness to energy conservation"

Consciousness isn't actually conservative of anything, and the US
doesn't "conserve" anywhere near as much energy as, say, Japan, where
they didn't bother to act all pious about it.

*"healthier eating"

You're aware of the fact on the ground that there's an obesity
epidemic, right?  A mainstreaming of sprouts and tofu didn't change
that.


"the manner in which we use our military resources"

*This assertion I frankly don't understand.  
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #52 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 08 09:26

    
"my perceptions of peak oil are affected by my surroundings -- a mess
of clueless people buying poorly built 6,000 square-foot houses and
driving 2 hours each way to work in three-ton SUVs..."

*I know there are a lot of people who think that the American Way of
Life Is Not Negotiable...  Cheney was perfectly willing to wreck that
American prosperity in order to save it...  but I sincerely don't think
the American population is as mentally frail as everybody in the
American population seems to think the American population is.

For instance, I never heard any American ever express any genuine fear
of Al Qaeda.  "He's powerful... he's ruthless and strong... I'm afraid
of him; we'd better do what he says."  I never heard any American,
even from the weirdest and most extreme fringes of the American polity,
actually express any genuine terror of bin Laden.  They're just not
intimidated.

And he is scary, but he's nowhere near so scary as the full-scale
terror lockdown TSA bullshit security-theater would suggest inside
America.  Americans don't tremble all over and need a Daddy because of
Osama bin Laden.  They got plenty of politicians eager to volunteer for
the post of Long Emergency Dictator  (because you get to abduct and
torture people and wiretap AT&T and cool stuff like that), but they're
not a naturally timorous people at the point of mental breakdown from a
terror campaign. 

Similarly, I never heard any American sincerely say that their life
would end if they lacked an SUV and a Mc Mansion.   Those are
fashionable possessions in some circles, but they're not entirely
necessary to American self-esteem.   Big junkola cars and tract homes
are actually something of a hayseed lower-middle-class possession. 
Genuinely rich Americans are vastly more interested in immaterial stuff
like stock options and boardroom positions than they are in big burly
vehicles.

The SUV-critique thing is more like bohemians dismissing the
straight-life than it is a principle of consumer behavior. If you go to
the Davos Forum you don't meet a traffic jam of SUVs.  You do see a
traffic jam of sunglassed bodyguards and elegant, multi-lingual
mistresses clad in Gucci, but not a lot of, you know, big Winnebagos.

If civilization cracks, it's gonna be because something really cracks
it, not because it's really scary to talk about terror and loss.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #53 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 08 09:34

    
Reacting to #50 and #51:

<rant>
Though there was interesting, often visionary thinking about the
future of the environment in the 60s and 70s, any mainstreaming of that
thinking was a best a fad, and at worst, it was part of an extended
tantrum, a rebellion of the privileged who were too young and
inexperienced to understand that they were in an exceptional context,
richer and smarter than any generation before them, but without any
real tradition of wisdom to guide them.  Us, I should say, because I
was one of them. Our parents didn't know how to respond, they were
still in shock, still recovering from their own close encounter with
the terrible reality of global war, a reality they glossed through
postwar cinema and television, with romanticized technicolor
re-creations, sanitized battle scenes and heroic inferences. We bought
those depictions, and were disillusioned when we encountered the world
as is, peered into the heart of darkness ourselves in Vietnam and in
our own troubled cities and lives. How could we think clearly, en
masse, and create anything of lasting value? We were spoiled brats,
terribly egocentric. We used the environmental movement as a tool of
rebellion and a manifestation of our despair as we saw the world more
clearly, and we weren't equipped to create viable solutions. I don't
think we raised consciousness all that much. I think we told ourselves
we were growing more aware as we fell into a stupor. Think of all the
drugs we consumed... and look at the glut we've permitted ourselves.
</rant>

(BTW I saw a film a couple of nights ago, "The Ballad of Jack and
Rose," that was resonant - his "higher" environmental awareness drove
the egocentric Jack into isolation, and his rejection of the world
infected his daughter, Rose, in a terrible way.)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #54 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 08 09:42

    
#52: In fact much of the residential building these days seems to be
high-density. The wealthy people I know are wanting downtown condos
(which, unfortunately at the moment, only they can afford), and they
want to drive Toyota Priuses or pluggable hybrids... or buy expensive
bicycles and tool around on 'em.

When you say "it's gonna be because something really cracks it," are
you thinking exclusively physical-catastrophic event (sudden climate
shift, asteroid or supervolcano)?  Is there a preventable
sociopolitical "crack" out there we should be worrying about, or are
you assuming society in general is level enough to prevent something
like a declaration of martial law next November?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #55 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sat 5 Jan 08 09:47

    
"Genuinely rich Americans are vastly more interested in immaterial
stuff
like stock options and boardroom positions..."

Well, no shit.  I've never been to Davos, but I've been to Georgia on
a fast train, and yes, the mini-Mansion/SUV thing is a hayseed pursuit
of sorts, although if you're lower-middle-class in this area, no big
tract homes for you, even after the recent (so far modest) decline in
prices.  There are, of course, different lifestyles of the rich and
famous, I've seen everything from glitzy and tacky to very low profile
to gloomy old houses with millions of dollars of art on the wall to
whatever -- I guess that's one of the things about being rich - you get
to choose.

I agree that only a minority of people, albeit a somewhat vocal one,
is really terrified by bin Laden & ilk.  We did have a few people here
on the WELL who pretty much seemed to "snap" after 9/11.  And there's
always Dennis Miller.

Anyway, I'm not sure if we really disagree.  To raise the Nazis again
(oh why not, although Godwin may come here to dump on us) one of the
reasons that some people were so convinced that area bombing of cities
would lead to instant surrender is because they figured life would just
grind to a halt in such horrific conditions.  But of course it didn't
-- people kept going to their jobs, kept carrying on in whatever way
they could.  Although yes, at the very end, social institutions had
collapsed to the extent that there was not really anything resembling a
German civil government to sign the surrender.  But I'm not expecting
a firebombing campaign followed by a Red Army invasion any time soon.

I agree that humans are adaptable -- especially if the choices are
adapt or die.  But I think that the degree of adaptation required by
Peak Oil will be quite considerable.

A couple of slips by Mr. Lebkowsky there....
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #56 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 5 Jan 08 11:37

    
*Well, if the historical movement had actually *achieved* those
things, as opposed to preaching about 'em, I'd be all reverential. 
No, I wouldn't be all reverential, I frankly don't care,
 
*"healthier eating"

You're aware of the fact on the ground that there's an obesity
epidemic, right?  A mainstreaming of sprouts and tofu didn't change
that.

"the manner in which we use our military resources"

*This assertion I frankly don't understand.  


The systemic challenges we're talking about were first looked at in an
integrated manner by large numbers of people in the late 60s and 70s. 
Of course, the "alternative society" envisioned by that diverse body
of concerned people only somewhat changed the mainstream.  Those things
that could be commoditized, or which fit into larger political
objectives were adopted, coopted by the larger culture.  The fact that
many of the concerns were not "achieved" may only mean that the day of
reckoning for those concerns were delayed. The problems facing us are
systemic and fueled by an economic system that has become in our
information age ever more efficient at extracting and distributing
finite resources.

Of course, some of the proponents of change were ego-centric, pious,
on the spiritual fringes, part of radical "Green" politics, etc.  Your
dismissiveness seems to conflate individual motivation with the goals
of those looking to find solutions to perceived problems facing humans.
 Isn't America's growing obesity problem the result of a proliferation
of old school fast foods/ time pressures making the home cooked meal
less common/ electronic cocooning of our kids.  Suggesting that
increased information/awareness of healthier eating choices is
responsible for those choosing to ignore them, is ludicrous.

Bush/Cheney could also be termed ego-centric, pious, on the spiritual
fringes, and part of radical politics (not "Green", but
neo-conservative).  The difference is that Bush/Cheney only give a shit
about the "base" of supporters that the current "system" rewards, and
not the least about these larger concerns. They are far more radical on
the world stage than those addressing Global Warming, energy
shortages, etc.

Just because the system was not changed as a result of those who
wished for systemic change in the 60s/70s, does not negate the concerns
that were addressed then.  One problem with Bush/Cheney/Rumsfeld is
that they are so reactionary to the best that their own generation had
to offer that they are making age-old mistakes such as using military
might to solve internal political problems in foreign lands.  If there
is one lesson that should have been learned in Vietnam, irrespective of
one's politics, is that it is much easier to enter a war than to exit
from one.  As for my military comment, which applies to the overall
statement, there was a brief time when the youth of the U.S. seized the
moral high ground on questions of war, the environment, organic foods,
etc.  It was a largely leaderless voice that did raise consciousness
on a number of fronts.  One of the reasons why the US military
establishment didn't invade anywhere (other than Granada) in the late
70s and 80s, was because it was politically unpalatable in the wake of
Vietnam.  The neo-conservative "radicalism" of Bush & friends flies in
the face of those earlier consciousness gains.   
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #57 of 116: Jon Berlin (bumbaugh) Sat 5 Jan 08 13:07

    
(another contribution from off-Well)



Bruce,

I 'm pleased to see that you are engaged this year as I very much
enjoy these discussions.  It is good stuff.

Interesting that a lot of the recent discussion here (oil, population,
government control) are ideas kicked around in 'Counting Heads' by
David Marusek.  Everything doesn't even out in a good
democratic/socialist sense: The divide between the rich and poor is
larger than ever and government is more pervasive than ever albeit
abetted by corporate greed.  It's a bit of what used to be called a
Negative Utopia but now may be called 'the way things are going'.

Related to the events described in the book is the American people are
now subject to some of the highest levels of public surveillance in
the world (along with Britain, Russia, China, etc.) and don't seem to
mind because they are so entertained and the opportunity for
entertainment is abundant.  Large screen LCDs are flying off the
shelves as are virtually every type of media geegaw.  With the advent
of user generated content added to existing corporate content and IP
delivery of all content the choices are overwhelming.  It's a circus.
Given the widening gap between the rich and poor the bread is unevenly
distributed but the entertainment is available for all and people will
find a way to get their entertainment even if they have to sacrifice
some of the bread to do it.  So the question: Is the circus going to
keep us entertained and consuming on a worldwide scale until we and
everything else are all used up and still subject to increased
draconian governmental controls or are people using some of what is
available to them and starting to think?  Where are the pockets of
resistance?

Thanks,

jon

Jon Berlin
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #58 of 116: Julian Bond (bumbaugh) Sat 5 Jan 08 13:09

    
(and this from off-Well, too)


On apocaphilia, I've been thinking back to your earliest novels and the
Shapers vs Mechanists (and Ribofunk). There seem to me to be some
parallels in approaches between reality now and some of those themes.
The Shaper approach to peak oil might perhaps be vast vats of
genetically engineered algae converting sunlight, carbon dioxide and
water into petroleum pre-cursors directly. The Mechanist approach might
be renewable electricity production driving a stay at home culture where
we live our lives entirely online. Some of Charles Stross' futures seem
to be happening as well as of all things, datacentres are now becoming a
major consumer of electrical power. Do we have to devote all our
resources to supporting the computronium?

One way of dealing with the apocalyptic thinking is to follow
Buckminster Fuller and take a stance of aggressive optimism. There will
*always* be a technical fix because humans respond to adversity with
creativity. Yes, the future will be messy, but it's always been messy.
Very large numbers of people will survive it and the majority will have
a higher standard of living than they do now. We shouldn't stop or even
slow down until the majority of humanity has an equivalent lifestyle to
Louis XIV. This is where I disagree with some of the Green movement.
Tightening your belt and accepting a reduced lifestyle is not a
solution.

As a European I find it amusing that you're suggesting a return to city
states while living in Italy. Because Italy as a nation state is less
than 150 years old and for most of recorded history has been a loose
federation of shifting alliances between city states. This is actually
true of most of Europe. What seems to be happening in Europe is that
people think of themselves as belonging to three levels. A local
cultural group such as Basque, Bavaria, Catalunya or Scotland; A
Nationality; A citizen of Europe. Increasingly, I think we're seeing
laws and customs decided at the local level and continental level and
we're losing interest in the people trying to claim power at the
national level. The problem is that those national institutions have a
lot of momentum and self interest so they're not going to fade away that
fast even if we ignore them. That said, I'm very uncomfortable with
trying to extrapolate the European experience out to the rest of the
world. Is the same thing happening in, say, Brazil or Thailand?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #59 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 08 13:27

    
Scott, I'm trying to get my head around this.

You mentioned "many of the *transformations* that resulted from that
earlier activism, such as a raised consciousness to energy
conservation, healthier eating, the manner in which we use our military
resources, etc."

That seems to imply that you were talking about widespread
transformation, and not isolated pockets of alternative thinking, as a
result of which "the system was not changed."

I think some of us assumed from your characterization of the period
that  you were suggesting mainstream change. I think we can all agree
that there've been changes in thinking about the environment over the
years, but until and unless these changes drive new behaviors, how much
better off are we? By raising this question, I don't see that Bruce
has "negated the concerns."

> One of the reasons why the US military establishment 
> didn't invade anywhere (other than Granada) in the late 70s 
> and 80s, was because it was politically unpalatable in the wake of
> Vietnam.

Not just Grenada - there was also Panama, 1989.

Practically speaking, though some opposed the war in Vietnam on
ethical grounds, it's not clear that opposition would have been as
loud, as ultimately widespread, or as successful had it not been for
the draft. The war didn't feel necessary; many of us who might have
been drafted didn't want to go there, and we made our feelings known.
Imagine what you'd be seeing today, if the draft was still in effect.

(#58 slipped in)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #60 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Sat 5 Jan 08 13:56

    
An overarching comment first: cities are one of humankind's most
enduring organizations, and likely reveals a lot about our (in)ability
to visualize large organizations as a whole (real or not). People grok
cities. We have strong opinions of their character. People visit
"cities" in the U.S. too as Bruce says of the EU.  It's a good scale to
support some centralization (water, transport) yet allow diversity in
culture and commerce. Urban poverty sucks, but rural poverty is worse!


jonl: And how do we get buy-in... how
do you convince citizens of ascendant
developing nations that they don't want
SUVs, suburban lifestyles, swimming
pools in every back yard, etc.

I think it's the same as here in the US: we need to learn a new way to
make personal decisions. We still act as if inexpensive durable goods
is a new thing, and don't choose for underlying functionality, ignore
"side effects" (sic), etc.  It's in businesses' short-term interest to
get people to buy things.  US corporate law demands growth regardless
of long term effect.  I'm not holding my breath.

But fundamental change like that usually follows umm episodic changes
to which we have to adapt willy nilly. I'm not even sure it would be
nice to be otherwise; do we want large scale human culture to be [more]
easily molded by those with agendas, good or bad? (My anarchist
leanings revealed.)


Websites and a few CONSUMER REPORTS type entities aren't enough
conversation on how to think about the infinite r(ain,eign) of Stuff.
Voices selling talk louder.

If I have one persistent gloom-and-doom fear it's consolidated media
ownership. That you can enumerate, and see the effects of.  Even TSA I
think will Go Away not all that far from now, but they are the
proverbial Blunt Object.



bruces: And, pure predict-the-future
bait: what's going to happen in China
during and around the Olympics? What
follows in the wake?

It will be very telling! They could get all rigid and freak out
over transgressions as they've often done, but there's changes
afoot, like all the small business deals in Africa etc show
actual deep changes in approach, and there seems to be a desire
to take substantial part in planetary business and culture.

The Olympics generally bore me to death (umm not yet literally) but I
will be pay attention to the meta-Olympics as it unfolds there.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #61 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Sat 5 Jan 08 14:17

    
> <41>

What do they put into those "bicerin" anyway?  ;-)

What I mean by what was on the walls in the 60s is more about a critique of
mainstream society than about the alternatives offered at that time, which
frequently did fail, for all kinds of reasons.

That critique was mostly well taken, but there was nothing to be done with
it, aside from getting us out of the worst quagmire of the time, Vietnam.  
You can't very well expect corporations employing thousands of people and
representing billions of dollars in investment to just close up shop.  So
it got co-opted, in the early 70s, then beaten back by the Reagan/Bush
crowd.  Damn the realities, it's morning in America.

The idea of transforming institutions became popular in the nineties, but
then Bush II squeaked into office and less than a year later was handed a
virtual blank check by 9/11, putting such agendas on hold, although the 
progress made during the 90s was never really rolled back, and we're moving 
forward again despite the Bushites.

So I suppose it's fair to say that there really was no opportunity to take 
the critique of mainstream society to heart at the time it first arose to 
prominence.  It took us another 25 years to figure out what to do about it.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #62 of 116: Lloyd Duhon (radioastro) Sat 5 Jan 08 15:08

    
This post brought me back to the Well after many years of absence. I'm
grateful that I have rediscovered this place (via an RSS Feed, no
less).

I am of the optimist school in this debate. I have seen first hand the
ingenuity and creativity expressed by human beings when they are in
difficult situations. We are by our nature a resilient, expressive and
creative bunch.

My business is almost completely unaffected by large scale
bureaucracies of any sort, and is dependent only on a vibrant small
business community. This community is resilient and decentralized. We
exist because people have a need for our services. We would exist
despite currency, despite control, despite licensing and despite
someone else saying we should or should not exist.

From my experience, a city sized government is about the most
efficient level of government available. Even this level experiences an
almost humorous level of inability to control anything outside of
basic creature comforts such as public utilities.

In this, I also see consumption as an ever growing drive that will be
impossible to quell. Instead, I see the growing consumption market as a
challenge and an opportunity. There are enormous untapped resources
still available in our solar system. As costs increase for delivery of
consumable goods here on earth, we will find means to retrieve goods at
a lower delivery cost than the local resource. We have already
imagined many of these technologies, and they can be as feasible as the
current oil production infrastructure is today.

Our answer to a lack of consumable goods will be to expand beyond our
current home into the much broader solar system and beyond.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #63 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 5 Jan 08 15:46

    
Jon <59>

My comments were in response to a pervasive tone of derisiveness by
Bruce in post <41> where simplistic typecasting of certain elements
within the progressive/environmental movement is used to negate a
history that is making it possible to deal with global problems in a
more sophisticated way today.  We are not starting without any
precedence here.

*I had all those books on my shelf, too.  And yeah, their tech IS
obsolete.  And that's not a bug, that's a feature.  It's a feature of
hairshirt-green thinking.

This sort of commentary is simply not helpful as we move forward.  My
point is that, historically, there were many changes emanating from the
late 60s/70s movement, some of which were mainstreamed and some of
which still need to be addressed.  Lester Brown's population explosion
concerns. "Diet for a Small Planet".  The mindset in "The Last Whole
Earth Catalog".  

I believe that change begins with a new mindset.  Forestry practices
of the US Forest Service are based on sustainability today, but weren't
in the 60s, because the attitudes of forest science was not
ecologically driven.  Cars are smaller and more energy efficient. 
Attitudes toward litter and recycling are completely different. The
military decisions of the United States are questioned more today than
in 1957.  

My point is that our human attitudes go hand in hand with pressing
needs and circumstances in establishing how we move forward
industrially, politically, etc.  Dismissal of spiritually oriented
people or hairshirt-greenies is simply not necessary.  Frankly, the
origins of philosophies that address our current concerns
constructively, and with a hopeful attitude toward change came from
those fringes of society and, as such, shouldn't be discounted  as we
take the best of that history and look to move forward with the right
outlook.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #64 of 116: Thomas Armagost (silly) Sat 5 Jan 08 19:41

    <scribbled by silly Sat 7 Jul 12 17:17>
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #65 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 08 10:00

    
Do we have to devote all our
resources to supporting the computronium?

*I love stuff like this.

*To me, "sustainability" means a situation in which your descendants
are able to confront their own problems, rather than the ones you
exported to them.
If people a hundred years from now are soberly engaged with phenomena
we have no nouns and verbs for, I think that's a victory condition.

*On the other hand, if they're thumbing through 1960s Small World
paperbacks and saying "thank goodness we've finally managed to pare our
lives back exclusively to soybeans and bamboo," well, that's not the
end of the world, but it's about as appealing as a future global
takeover by the Amish.  Give me the computronium problems; at least I
can get out of bed and not have to mimic every move my grandpa made.


"As a European I find it amusing that you're suggesting a return to
city
states while living in Italy. Because Italy as a nation state is less
than 150 years old and for most of recorded history has been a loose
federation of shifting alliances between city states. This is actually
true of most of Europe."

*Yeah, that is indeed true of most of Europe.  Europe is where the
Westphalian system of nation-states was invented.  It shouldn't
surprise or amuse us too much if Europe's also the place where that
system crumbles and/or is transcended.  Europe has been a great
political laboratory for many millennia -- especially in Greece, Italy,
those little busted-up city-state muddles...

*They're turbulent, bloody, inefficient, but they also generate things
like democracy and a renaissance.


"I had all those books on my shelf, too.  And yeah, their tech IS
obsolete.  And that's not a bug, that's a feature.  It's a feature of
hairshirt-green thinking.
"This sort of commentary is simply not helpful as we move forward"

*What -- even it's true?  How inconvenient!

*There's stuff going on that's "moving forward," like, say, LEED
ratings and legislative requirements for green energy, and then there's
stuff that claims itself to be "progressive," but is basically
Lysenkoist, since it doesn't want to submit itself to any standard of
objective proof. 

*Well, I say that hairshirt-green stuff fails to innovate.  I say that
it's corny and it's retrograde, and it's inherently corny and
retrograde because its approach to society and technology is mistaken,
wrong-headed, dogmatic and poorly thought-through.   I say that it's
smallness is too small.  Its appropriateness is inappropriate.  It has
failed like the Arts and Crafts Movement failed.  No, it failed worse
than Arts and Crafts; it failed like the communal movement and the
Human Potential Movement and the League of Spiritual Discovery failed. 
As a design critic, I can't claim anything else with honesty. 
Thirty-eight years after Earth Day, the facts on the ground speak for
themselves.

*I'd never claim that Hairshirt Green was as violently pernicious as
the Great Leap Forward or Muslim fundamentalism, but there's just not a
lot of there there.  It doesn't work.

*So it's no good to call a nostalgia for 60s environmentalist notions
"progressive."  In 2008, that just obscures the reality on the ground. 
Its rhetorical puffery.

* Like, for instance, the smokescreen called "economic reform," which
always means privatizing stuff now.  When Putin goes and de-privatizes
a bunch of oil-wells and Russia immediately rises from its death-bed,
nobody calls that "Russian economic reform", even though this radical
regime Putin's patched together out of oil-wells and KGB veterans is
one of the fastest-changing, most radically re-forming,  nation-states
in the world today.  And it's also one of the most popular among its
voters.  So far.  That's "economic reform," but it's not what the
Murdoch-owned WALL STREET JOURNAL would like to anoint as "reform." 
And I would call bullshit on that, too.


"My point is that our human attitudes go hand in hand with pressing
needs and circumstances in establishing how we move forward
industrially, politically, etc.  Dismissal of spiritually oriented
people or hairshirt-greenies is simply not necessary." 

*I agree; they're pretty much auto-marginalizing.  I don't waste a lot
of time on spiritually oriented green; it's a lot more interesting to
me to see how, for instance, the city of Turin is being actually
re-built.  Like: where on Earth did they get the cash for all those
huge cranes?  And what's the deal with that giant rebuilt palace at
Venaria Reale?  Do they really expect that heap to pull in tourists?

 Frankly, the
origins of philosophies that address our current concerns
constructively, and with a hopeful attitude toward change came from
those fringes of society and, as such, shouldn't be discounted  as we
take the best of that history and look to move forward with the right
outlook.

*I love the fringes of society, but, as great designer Henry Dreyfuss
used to say, the best way to get three good ideas is to brainstorm a
hundred weird ideas and kill off 97 of them.  And we need to get used
to that process, and not, say, shut down Silicon Valley because there
are too many start-ups there wasting Microsoft's valuable resources.  

*We really do need to learn to generate lots of prototypes, throw 'em
at the wall, search them, sort them, rank them, critique them,  and
blow the best ones into global-scale proportions at high speed.  That's
what our contemporary civilization is really good at, and it is simply
beyond the imagination of the 1960s.

*If there's hope, it's in the facts.  It's not in faith.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #66 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 08 10:22

    
"Though there was interesting, often visionary thinking about the
future of the environment in the 60s and 70s, any mainstreaming of
that thinking was a best a fad, and at worst, it was part of an
extended tantrum, a rebellion of the privileged who were too young and
inexperienced to understand that they were in an exceptional context,
richer and smarter than any generation before them, but without any
real tradition of wisdom to guide them.  Us, I should say, because I
was one of them."

*I don't wanna do any special-pleading for Baby Boomers, and it's a
great thing when you can confess to your adult children that you've
really screwed up.  

*But.  People are neck-deep in historical circumstances.  The
condition of society is not all our own individual fault.  There were
lots of Baby Boomers in Communist China.  They were like, psycho Red
Guards who beat the crap out of university professors, and they didn't
even have LSD, much less charge cards.

*This change that's happened in China lately -- since Tiananmen,
really -- it makes it clear that there was some kind of tremendous
latent productive capacity in China that has been effectively
suppressed for centuries.  If you're a Baby Boomer in China right now,
I guess you could wring your hands a lot about being a wicked Red Guard
guy, but I don't think you ought to flatter yourself that there was
something particularly wicked about your generation.  It's more like
you were trying to pull a cart uphill with a noose around your neck.  

There's one thing worse than being young and full of stormy tantrums,
and that's being old and backward-looking and crotchety.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #67 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 08 11:37

    
> There's one thing worse than being young and full of stormy
tantrums,
> and that's being old and backward-looking and crotchety.

Heh... you know me too well.

But you can be backward-looking and forward-looking at the same time,
and that works best if you accept that neither is as real as right now.
I don't know much about Chinese boomers, if you can call them that,
but I was part of the boomer/counterculture/hippie scene. The joke is
that, if you were there, you don't remember it, but that's just a joke.
In fact, I remember it well. I suspect that Scott and others who write
about that era see it through their research and lose their sense of
the reality. Those of us who have lived long enough to have seen new
generations of scholars create histories based on real events are
inherently suspicious of those histories, because we can see their
flaws, and we want to present our version. However, though I say I
remember the 60s, I know that memory is also flawed.

We look back and review our mistakes because we don't want history to
repeat itself. I liked Stephen Dedalus's take, "History is a nightmare
from which I am trying to awake," but I could never quite wake up, or
escape some level of attachment to memory. You can't ignore karma and
karma-phala. The conditions/predicaments we're in have their causes,
and we fall into assessment and evaluation of those causes as we try to
comprehend, maybe mitigate, the effects.

At least I do, when I'm not twittering. *8^)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #68 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Sun 6 Jan 08 11:41

    <scribbled by satyr Sun 6 Jan 08 11:42>
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #69 of 116: John Payne (satyr) Sun 6 Jan 08 11:43

    
To shift gears a little, Scientific American has gotten behind an ambitious
plan to switch the U.S. over to renewable energy, primarily solar.  The
article runs on for six pages, the first of which is here...

http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=a-solar-grand-plan
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #70 of 116: Public persona (jmcarlin) Sun 6 Jan 08 11:45

    

This is an interesting area where science is way ahead of futurists.
For example: Scientists Use Sunlight to Make Fuel From CO2
http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2008/01/S2P

Matching coal plants with solar to get rid of the CO2 and produce
fuel is an interesting development.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #71 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 08 12:21

    
As you accumulate more history you get more interested in history, but
the great benefit of youth is that you don't have to forget that stuff
is impossible.

The past is gone, and our attempts to interpret it are retrodiction. 
The 1960s of the 1970s is not the same as the 1960s of 2008, and it
won't be the same as the 1960s of the 2040s.

Just lately I've gotten very interested in the Italy of the 1860s,
which was the brief span in which Turin was the capital of Italy.  This
lost capitalship is very much a living fact on the ground in Turin; it
explains a lot about the local temperament.

Still, there are like 30 or 40 distinct versions of the events of the
1860s, like, what was the "Risorgimento," and who really mattered
there: the glum ideologist Mazzini, or the ruthless technocrat  Cavour,
or the armed culture-hero Garibaldi...  

I'm not so postmodernist as to claim that there's no objective truth
about the 1860s, but these men, when they were acting in the 1860s,
didn't know it.  If you dragged 'em out of the grave and asked  them
what the hell was really going on in the 1860s, their vague ideas would
be even less useful than those of historians.

When you're a writer you tend to repeat yourself a lot.  Why can't I
wake from the nightmare of my own history? you think.  But then there
are flecks or even big weird patches of written stuff that really are
unique and unrepeatable -- like, say, a story inspired by some very
specific set of circumstances, unique and never to be recaptured.  And
those are upsetting in a different way.  
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #72 of 116: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Sun 6 Jan 08 12:21

    
>> *I love the fringes of society, but, as great designer Henry Dreyfuss
 used to say, the best way to get three good ideas is to brainstorm a
 hundred weird ideas and kill off 97 of them.  And we need to get used
 to that process, and not, say, shut down Silicon Valley because there
 are too many start-ups there wasting Microsoft's valuable resources.

 *We really do need to learn to generate lots of prototypes, throw 'em
 at the wall, search them, sort them, rank them, critique them,  and
 blow the best ones into global-scale proportions at high speed.  That's
 what our contemporary civilization is really good at, and it is simply
 beyond the imagination of the 1960s.
<<

It seems to me that what you're saying is that if we're going to make it
through this century, we need to fail often, fail spectacularly, but always
fail upwards -- learn from the 97 failures to make the 3 successes huge.
That argues for getting away as fast as possible from huge, eggs-in-one-
basket social/economic/technical models. Energy experiments with solar coal,
biotech hydrogen-farting bugs, photovoltaic plastic, vibration-generated
power floors, even sonofusion, and more. Most of these won't work, but the
only way we're going to figure out what *will* work is to try them out, find
the flaws, and toss out the stuff that's too broken to fix.

It's an Open Source Future -- not in the Richard Stallman GPL sense, but in
the John Robb Open Source Warfare sense: small groups, trying out different
pathways, telling each other what works and what doesn't.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #73 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 6 Jan 08 12:38

    
<Give me the computronium problems

You make many compelling arguments, Bruce, even though I think you
tend to oversimplify the history of the counterculture, especially its
integral dialectic role in the shaping of our postmodern culture.  

John Markoff wrote a book called: What the Dormouse Said: How the
Sixities Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry. 
Certainly, the information age has transformed the way business is done
in the world far more pervasively than even cutting-edge technology
geeks in the 60s (or people going back-to-the-land and living
communally in their Yurts) could have imagined.  I agree that high
technology must be part of any future solutions, (just as it has given
us a new set of societal ills and challenges, too).

One of the elements within the counterculture that most intrigues me
is the urge of so many people to connect to a sense of community in
ways that defied the increasing trends toward privatization within a
society that was, at the same time, relying more on mass communications
and mass delivery systems to connect us. The reaction, mostly
unsuccessful, was to voluntarily form extended "family" units.

Interestingly, the discussion here about the City-State becoming more
significant than the Nation-State is also about the comprehensibility
and sensibility of more decentralized social formations that allow us
to better control our own political/economic/social destinies, and to
feel significant as part of our immediate community.

The "Computronium" in this regard is a paradox. Aspects which feed the
efficiencies of the globalized market are inherently centralizing. 
Features such as My Space, chatrooms, highly accessible blogging, iPods
are decentralizing and privatizing, but privatizing in a way that also
allows for cybernetworks of interconnectedness.

This said, the electronic cocooning allows us, for the most part, the
simulacra of socializing, not the actual interconnectedness that, for
example, the communal esprit which the Back-to-the-Land folks looked to
foster. I do think that in a situation of total societal collapse at a
local level, this history of communal experimentation holds value as a
model for re-adapting. (Would you rather freeze or live in a yurt?/ 
Will you eat beans and yogurt when there is no beef?/ The love & peace
ethos would be essential.)  

The information age is here to stay.  I certainly don't envision an
either/or scenario where electronic simulacra will be supplanted by
healthier, in-the-flesh, interpersonal networks.  I don't see voluntary
asceticism of the kind you deride taking over either, because humans
almost always want to optimize their circumstances. Yet might not some
hybrid of configurations offer the best future.  We can be (and will
be) highly globalized, unless artificial boundaries are erected (by
Nation-States).  At the same time, the empowerment of more localized
political and social entities that give the individual a greater sense
of belonging and control, also makes sense. As for the computronium (if
I understand what this means), we will also have our WORLD Wide Web
AND our PERSONAL computing.  As for the best of the 60s/70s
countercultural sentiment, maybe we will also manifest healthier
opportunities to belong to in-the-flesh communities that sustain us,
socially, aesthetically and materially. 

The sense that we belong to our community and make a difference on an
individual basis is sadly missing in our "advanced" societies. We, as
humans, suffer from this disconnectedness.  This, I think, was the
thrust behind much of the "small is beautiful" ethos of the 60's and
70's.  On the other hand, if problems such as Global Warming or oil or
nuke or overpopulation threaten us with collapse, then, I agree, that
"blowing the best of them (solutions) toward global-scale proportions
at high speed" is the only logical approach.

  

   
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #74 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 6 Jan 08 13:13

    
From Jon: <it was part of an extended tantrum, [...] We were spoiled
brats, terribly egocentric.>
<I suspect that Scott and others who write about that era see it
through their research and lose their sense of the reality.>

Jon, I was born the year after Bruce.  I traveled for a year across
the US in a Volkswagen Bus, was a Deadhead before the caravanning
movement of Deadheads, spent time at various hippie communes (The Farm,
The Love Family, The Alpha Farm). Feel free to read my inkwell
interview on The Hippie Narrative or, better yet, the book.  While
exploring these last, legitimate, vestiges of the counterculture, I
became fascinated with the movement, BOTH intellectually and
personally.  I never dismissed the many, very sincere  people I met as
"spoiled brats" or even overly "egocentric". Most were trying to find
paths for themselves in a world that was turned on its head.  

The youthful foibles of that generation are so well documented today
that it makes it ever-so-easy to dismiss the many positives of those
who were brave enough to attempt wholesale change. I won't presume to
know what you did or didn't do to help change the world for the better
during your youth.  Of course there were negatives. (Do we need to talk
about Jimi/Janis/Jim/Charlie Manson or other iconic distortions?). 
Frankly, to whatever extent that a spoiled egocentrism affected those
in the counterculture, I would take their manifestation of this trait
over the cadre of spoil brats and egomaniacs of the same generation who
currently infect our White House.  
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #75 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 08 14:07

    
Scott, I wasn't intentionally dismissive.  You can be a spoiled brat,
egocentric, also very sincere... we all have various aspects of our
personalities, of our lives. My earlier point was that we of the
postwar baby boom, middle class division, were inherently spoiled and
inherently innocent, because our parents were building a reality
intended to isolate us, and them, from the darker realities they had
just encountered. I'm generalizing about a privileged class, a subset
of the larger postwar reality in the U.S., and I'm talking about
childhood in the 50s.  In the 60s, as we grew older and fell into the
Real World beyond our doorsteps, we found the darker reality and didn't
quite know what to do with it. Many, myself included, tried to fix it
in various ways. Many were damaged by it. Many found ways to be
successful in dealing with the real world they found.

I'm a bit older, so my perspective might be a little different, but I
admit I have a darker view of that period than you seem to have.  Yes,
I met sincere people who were trying to make the world better. However
I also met many who were deluded, arrogant, drug-crazed, power-crazed,
cult-crazed, and sometimes downright criminal. You keep mentioning the
White House - I think George W. Bush is as much a child of that time as
anybody.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #76 of 116: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Sun 6 Jan 08 14:14

    
I have a bright view of that period as well, although I'm half a blip
younger than Jon. I found the darker reality in that period as well,
even as an adolescent, but I knew what to do with it right away --
avoid it if you could, fight it if you couldn't!

I've written about some of those themes on my WELL website page
devoted to the subject of "frootbats."

I am the dog in the corner who growls for no apparent reason when the
bad guy walks into the saloon. Even my very concrete wife has learned
to trust my intuition.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #77 of 116: FROM KYLE JOHNSON (davadam) Sun 6 Jan 08 15:25

    
Kyle Johnson comments:

This conversation needs a heretic:

I'd like to chime in defense of conspiracy theorists by asserting
that, in the big picture scheme of things, they have an annoying
tendency of being more right than they are wrong. Take, for instance,
the
9-11-was-an-inside-jobbers: Were the Towers packed with plastique on
the secret orders of Paul Wolfowitz to kickstart the Frankenstein
Monster for a New American Century? Eh, no. But the 9-11 hijackers
*were* the dividend of a paramilitary network financed and trained by
America in the 1980s, because we appreciated their penchant for giving
the Soviets their own taste of Vietnam; Provide free schooling and
financing to stone-cold killers and it's going to come back and bite
you in the ass every time. (Cf. the old story about "The Scorpion and
the Frog", I always thought it was an old Buddhist parable but it turns
out it was written by Orson Welles! Thanks, Wikipedia: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scorpion_and_the_frog)

My point is, since we created and paid for the people that did it, I'd
say the sentence "9-11 was inside job" is, on balance, more true than
it isn't. Similarly, I find classic conspiracy theory statements such
as "We invaded Iraq to steal their oil", "Karl Rove runs Diebold" and
"Dick Cheney is an Evil Robot" are ultimately more useful as being
understood as (at least 51%) truthful. Even though, when you actually
try to connect the breadcrumbs the conspiracy theorist whackjob is
screaming at you across the crowded bar, it's obviously all a load of
bollocks.

What I'm proposing for 2008 is an evolution beyond the limitations of
General Conspiracy Theory to arrive at something of a Quantum Theory of
Conspiracies. Where it's perfectly OK that we can't find the location
of the second gunman because it's impossible to simultaneously know the
location of an assassin and the vector of his bullet. This is exciting
stuff: A corrollary Quantum Theory of Jesus could yield an equation
resolving Original Sin with the Carbon Footprint while sidestepping the
zero denominator the literal interpretation of the Pentateuch. Of
course, there are always costs. One predictable side effect would is an
attendent renaissance in crappy sympathy card poetry, with punchlines
such as, ">>Dear God, when I looked back on the most difficult parts of
my life, there was no footprint at all! >>That, my child, is because I
was busy composting your hidebound, nihilistic orthodoxy. An 8000-year
old planet? Jesus Christ!"
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #78 of 116: FROM PATRICK FREEMAN (davadam) Sun 6 Jan 08 15:26

    
Patrick Freeman comments:

I have to agree with Scott MacFarlane.  I'm 63 years old, born in 1944
and graduated from college in 1966.  So I'm probably a bit older than
the average reader here, and was probably a bit younger than the
average Vietnam vet, at least military officers who served in Vietnam,
since that is what I was.  An Air Force officer for nearly 25 years. 
Despite what many here would probably consider a grievous handicap of a
career, I was influenced by much of what happened in the '60s and '70s
in America and the world.  I found the Whole Earth Catalog endlessly
fascinating, and was an early convert to the environmental concepts and
concerns introduced by Rachel Carson in Silent Spring.  I read all the
classic back to the earth texts and dreamed of building my own
furniture and my own home on a few acres of woodland.  But, for the
most part, like most everyone else, I didn't.  I had a wife and kids, a
career which gave me sustenance, graduate education, and a feeling of
contributing to something larger than merely grubbing a few bucks. 

The environmental and philosophical movements of the '60s and '70s
gave birth to the society we live in today.  We found some truth in the
back to the land movement and in our first meager attempts to
enlighten and improve American society.  My wife and I still refer to
Diet for a Small Planet  and recycle everything we can.  We voted for
McGovern in '72 and even Dukakis in '88, and are in utter despair at
the devastation wrought by Bush and Cheney, and their corporate
henchmen over the first long years of the 21st century.  But we still
find hope in America and Americans.  We live in a nice house in a nice
community and drive a nice, newer minivan, but do not aspire to SUVs
and McMansions.  Peak oil?  I commuted 100 miles per day to a solar
observatory in the desert east of San Diego during the first "oil
shock" of the 1970's (in a car pool, of course).  We saw some few
people who would line up every day to buy gasoline to feed their motor
homes for the weekend, but we saw more people who were cooperative and
understanding, and patient.  We think these latter types will
ultimately prevail.  We understand our place in the world and our
responsibilities as citizens of the planet and the nation.  We live
with hope and optimism, and are not about to give up and lapse into
cynicism and despair.  We think we will find a way through the looming
challenges of the future, and believe our grandchildren will live
better lives than we do now.  That, after all, is why we are here. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #79 of 116: NEAL SOLDOFSKY (davadam) Sun 6 Jan 08 15:27

    
Neal Soldofsky comments:

Hey all, thanks for the wonderful discussion.

#60 < If I have one persistent gloom-and-doom fear it's consolidated
media ownership. That you can enumerate, and see the effects of.

Me, I'm not that terrified of consolidated media ownership in the long
term, because I think in the long term the internet will be the most
important media platform for most people. Then, of course, control goes
into the hands of the ISP's, who are themselves a pretty consolidated
and unsavory lot, but the internet is too hard to control for me to
worry about those people. And I think people will freak the hell out if
anyone messes with there internets. You'd have to be real subtle to
manage it, and I don't think it would be possible to do it in a subtle
way. 

I only see traditional medial companies being able to maintain control
over big budget things. The real question is whether or not they will
lose their grip on the news, and I think they will, eventually. But it
might be ten years before things really change in terms of who controls
the news, and with our terrible quality of news, and the direness of
the times, that does seem like a long while. 

What's your take on this Bruce? How do you think the internet will
affect news and the way people consume it? Do you think people will be
more or less informed? 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #80 of 116: MICHAEL HEAP (davadam) Sun 6 Jan 08 15:27

    
Michael Heap comments:

Bruce, my thoughts return to last year with your discussion, im still
thinking of the points raised, very inspirational. Through a number of
discussions ive come to the conclusion that yes its going to take far
more than green teacups bailing us out of our current problems to 'save
the world', its going to have to take a Manhattan style project, with
the best and the brightest being given a huge amount of resources to
try to solve the problems at hand. Trying every crazy ass scheme they
can come up with. From sinking huge concrete spheres in the ocean to
suck co2 out of the ocean and subsequently out of the atmosphere,
punching a hole in the atmosphere to vent co2 into space, to promoting
algal blooms in surface water via Co2 & Iron dust, man made volcanoes
spewing sulpher into the atmosphere, air capture and processing via
artificial trees.  all utopian thinking but without funding and
serious asynchronous thinking we will never know. 
 
I also have a feeling that the small individual efforts are virtually
a waste of time (an false panacea or placebo if you will) if not
detrimental to the CO2 reduction because it allows people to think we
can continue business as usual.  And here is my thinking.
 
Recycling  most recycling actually uses more energy/resources than it
saves  think about the massive recycling ghettos in China and India
that recycle our detritus, in this case im thinking of electronics
recycling where the primary goal is to recover valuable metals for on
sale  don't let the 'recycling' sales pitch fool you  what the
business is about is recovering scrap metals, not disposing of
materials in a safe and green way 
 
Hybrid/Electric vehicles  the energy required to manufacture the
vehicles (im specifically thinking about the batteries & shipping here)
 - the nickel ore alone is mined in Ontario, (Acid rain damage)
shipped to Europe for smelting (CO2 emissions), then shipped to china
to produce nickel foam (CO2 & other environmental impact), then
subsequently shipped to Japan to make batteries & then assembled into
cars(CO2 & other environmental impact). Then shipped to where ever the
car is intended to be driven (CO2)  don't let the CO2 friendly
advertising fool you  a prius causes more environmental damage than a
SUV  and is more expensive per mile too. 
 
Carbon offset  for that cross country flight you've just taken for
Christmas -  you were carbon neutral right? You coughed up the cash and
paid to off set the carbon right? Well check the company you gave your
cash to. First of all traditional carbon offsetting is massively
inefficient way of getting rid of CO2, Planting trees  hmm great idea
 well it depends on what you do with them afterward, doesn't it, in an
ideal world you plant quick growing trees cut them down and bury them.
Not let IKEA buy the pine in 10 years time turn the trees into wood
pulp then build you a new bookcase which ends up as burnable landfill
in 3 years time. Its also very hard to quantify the levels of CO2
removed from the atmosphere by planting trees. Secondly how can you
tell the company you're giving money to is actually planting trees?
Most companies providing carbon offsetting schemes are less than
transparent and the projects are entirely unregulated and is planting
trees really the best and quickest way to offset co2? 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #81 of 116: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 6 Jan 08 15:46

    
When I moved to the bay area I found all the remnants of the sixties
here to be tremendously appealing, especially compared to my hometown
where there was little obvious evidence that the sixties had actually
happened there.

But there's a difference between learning from history and being
obsessed by it.  It would be a shame if our relationship with the
sixties turned into something like the old South's obsession with the
Civil War.  Luckily there's not all that much danger of it.

There's a lot of the past mixed in with the present, but the parts
that are most obviously of the sixties are the anachronisms.  Maybe the
best way to honor the past is to recycle it.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #82 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Sun 6 Jan 08 16:42

    
 *We really do need to learn to generate lots of prototypes,
 throw 'em at the wall, search them, sort them, rank them,
 critique them,  and blow the best ones into global-scale
 proportions at high speed.  That's what our contemporary
 civilization is really good at, and it is simply beyond the
 imagination of the 1960s.

The point I see behind 'lots of prototypes' and '100 
ideas... kill off 97 of them' isn't the successful products
but the failures themselves. You learn from failures; little is
learned from successes (though we often benefit from them). I
teach electronics and fabrication to art grad kids, and getting
them to 'post mortem' their failures without shame or beratement
is a worthwhile chore. First-time success leads to subsequent
failure.


Bruce's point about industrial carbon credits and such is spot
on; it's not a "60's" environmental type ideal; it's a hard
and cold technique of the present, that time will tell us if
it worked or not. Best case is that 20, 50 years it's laughbly
silly because we're doing something better.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #83 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Sun 6 Jan 08 16:55

    
davadam:
> Me, I'm not that terrified of
> consolidated media ownership in the
> long term, because I think in the
> long term the internet will be the
> most important media platform for
> most people.

I'm sorry, but I can never understand why people insist "the
internet is different". It's not. It's not decentralized (some of
its protocols are); when it was demilitarized, it wasn't handed
to some public entity to run (not that I think that would work)
but to commercial businesses. It was an unattended playground,
but that phase is ending (has ended).

It's unique and decentralized-looking at this moment. You're
fooling yourself if you think this somehow inherent in "the
internet".

davadam:
> Then, of course, control goes into the
> hands of the ISP's, who are themselves
> a pretty consolidated and unsavory
> lot, but the internet is too hard to
> control for me to worry about those
> people.

Pre-comma, well duh, there you go. Post comma, huh? Unlike even
the telephone network, where the contained traffic is an analog
representation of human utterance, and hard to machine-parse,
everything
within the internet has tightly-defined symbolic meaning, and
trivial to parse. It's a done deal.

Sorry for the 2nd post.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #84 of 116: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 6 Jan 08 18:50

    
Easy to say by someone who hasn't actually tried to parse the
Internet.

If the ISP's make a serious try of it, encryption will be used a lot
more than it is now.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #85 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 08 20:48

    
Rather than parse the Internet, Tom created his own. 

(http://www.region17.net/jennings.html)

>> I think in the
>> long term the internet will be the
>> most important media platform for
>> most people.
>
> I'm sorry, but I can never understand why people insist "the
> internet is different". It's not.

I think the Internet does present a different environment for media,
in that anyone can have access to the means of production and
distribution, and in this context, when we see "the media" cover a
story, it's not a handful of broadcast channels we're talking about,
but a combination of increasingly more interactive and user-driven
professional media channels and media sources that are more or less
amateur operations. I think davadam is saying, "so what if the Daily
Planet owns every broadcast channel in Metropolis - I'm getting my news
from blogs like Weblogsky and Beyond the Beyond."  You've got a
bazillion ways to aggregate news and build your world-view, without
reference to newspapers, television, or radio. And where can Rupert
Murdoch go to buy a controlling interest in the Internet?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #86 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Sun 6 Jan 08 22:47

    
jonl: I think davadam is saying, "so
what if the Daily Planet owns every
broadcast channel in Metropolis -
I'm getting my news from blogs like
Weblogsky and Beyond the Beyond."
You've got a bazillion ways to
aggregate news and build your
world-view, without reference to
newspapers, television, or radio. And
where can Rupert Murdoch go to buy a
controlling interest in the Internet?

But you could have viewed radio that way in 1940, and look what
happened there -- with few exceptions, it's a total wasteland
today (U.S. anyhoo). Relentless vertical integration. The seeds
of that conglomeration were there the whole time, visible in
station ownership patterns, 80 years of legal assaults by GE et al,
tech manufacturers, music industry influences -- but it wasn't
*seen* that way until it was too late.

I am in no way insisting that this will happen to the internet
-- but I am asserting that the converse -- this mythology of
the self-healing decentralized anarchic internet -- is not only
wrong, but harmful.

But look at music -- in 1900 music meant performance almost
exclusively; by the 1980's there was a near total vertical
integration -- artist contracts, production, distribution --
but just as it got apocalyptic the collapse began that we're
experiencing now (cheap recording tech, CDRs, downloads,
...). Today the meaning of "music" has been utterly culturally
transformed. Though I didn't experience music pre-recording,
I like what 'music' means today. So nothing's certain and it's
not all bad news.


I think also that there is a fear that if we "lose" the internet,
we really are lost. That may be in fact true. Where WOULD we
be today if we did not have an internet?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #87 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 08 04:32

    

*I'm a big fan of subcultures, countercultures and bohemias.  They
generate a lot of strange ideas and alternative practices.  A lot of
those ideas turn out to be crap, of course, but at least they're being
pioneered by volunteers, they're not crap ideas opposed from on high by
the Stalinist Central Committee.

I'm from Austin, where we have the Austin light-bulb joke.

"How many Austinites does it take to change a light-bulb?
"Three, one to do it and two to reminisce about how great Austin was
in the 60s."

A slightly dated joke as Austinites are now likelier to be installing
cold LED flat-panel displays in their creative-class atelier, but you
get the point.

It's soppy to be a 60s nostalgist, but really, there's a LOT more
written about Nazis and what Nazis believed than about hippies and what
hippies believed.  A coinage like "Islamo-fascist" will get you all
kinds of traction, whereas describing Al Qaeda as
"Islamo-BaaderMeinhof" would get you a big fat "huh?"  Even though the
Red Army Fraktion got a lot of its tactics and weapons training from
the Middle East terror groups, and even though they were 60s armed
radicals very big on suicide.  Remember "konsumterror"?  People who are
all down on consumerism oughta bone up a little on "konsumterror."   
It's like: you're a materialist, so I knock over an armored car and
then kneecap you.  Truly the missing legacy of the 70s.

People who talk about the failings of Boomers always talk about hippie
leftie druggie Boomers, but Bush is a Boomer, so is Gingrich, so is
Rove.  Most of the NeoCons are Boomers, except a few of their gray
emininences.  When it comes to seizing power and enforcing radical
change on society, Neoconservativism has pretty much gotta be the
Boomer philosophy par excellence.  Except maybe for Al Qaeda, because
Bin Laden's a Boomer, too.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #88 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 08 04:47

    
"But look at music -- in 1900 music meant performance almost
exclusively; by the 1980's there was a near total vertical
integration -- artist contracts, production, distribution --
but just as it got apocalyptic the collapse began that we're
experiencing now (cheap recording tech, CDRs, downloads,
...). Today the meaning of "music" has been utterly culturally
transformed. Though I didn't experience music pre-recording,
I like what 'music' means today. So nothing's certain and it's
not all bad news."

*I never imagined I'd be the kinda guy who says "kids these days have
music that sucks."  In fact pretty much ALL AND EVERY aspect of popular
culture has suffered under the Bush Administration, but music,
especially so.

*Best-selling albums of 2007... there's like, Daughtry, who's a
Japanese-style TV-manufactured pop idoru...  a Christmas Carols
album...  a Walt Disney soundtrack... Fergie, Justin Timberlake, the
Police and the Beatles.  I don't mind Fergie, those she's not a
musician, and Justin Timberlake is a professional entertainer who works
hard for his millions, but that's music from a despondent era.  It's
like the pre-rock-and-roll days of Pat Boone's white suede shoes and
"How Much Is That Doggie in the Window".

Why should the Police, biggest band of the early 80s, and the Beatles,
biggest band of the 60s (with two dead guys in it), kick the ass of
musicians in the 00s?  Because their competition has been strangled,
that's why.  The Bush regime is a grim, dispirited period.  Everybody
knows there's something wrong with it.


"I think also that there is a fear that if we "lose" the internet,
we really are lost. That may be in fact true. Where WOULD we
be today if we did not have an internet?"

There's a science fiction anthology written on this theme.
http://www.louanders.com/livewithoutanetpage.htm

I didn't write anything for that book.  Unfortunately.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #89 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 08 06:59

    
"...Bush is a Boomer, so is Gingrich, so is
Rove.  Most of the NeoCons are Boomers, except a few of their gray
emininences.  When it comes to seizing power and enforcing radical
change on society, Neoconservativism has pretty much gotta be the
Boomer philosophy par excellence."

My point, exactly. The sixties grew more Bush/Roves than hippies. They
were doing est or starting to build businesses or work for
politicians, instead of living on communes. Some (e.g. Bill Gates) were
beginning, or preparing, to build corporate empires.

"It'slike the pre-rock-and-roll days of Pat Boone's white suede shoes
and 'How Much Is That Doggie in the Window'."

The centralized, corporate music industry is crumbling, undone in part
by competition from independents at a micro level, the sort of bands
that are getting exposure and circulation via systems like emusic,
which charges a flat rate for a set monthly number of perfectly legal
music downloads. (Music also circulates freely through file sharing
communities, but the RIAA seems to be working aggressively to put that
genie back in the bottle... which won't fix their core problem, which
is that the traditional music industry is disintermediated and undone
by digital convergence.)

Sale of recorded music is no longer a great way to make money - the
bands that are doing well make money by touring, and they have hundreds
of online channels to promote their music and their performances.

David Byrne describes the new world of digital music very well in an
article in the current issue of Wired:
http://www.wired.com/entertainment/music/magazine/16-01/ff_byrne
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #90 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 7 Jan 08 07:08

    
<It's soppy to be a 60s nostalgist>

But it's no more "soppy" to take an historical, disaffected look at
the hippie ethos than it is to wrap oneself in geekspeak, sci-fi
coinages and pretend that this is what is going to really happen in the
future. Utopianism can distort both views. You talked about moving
forward with fact, not faith. For purposes of a pragmatic futurism, I
agree, yet faith-based initiatives, whether Jihadist, apocalyptic
Christian, etc. are wildcards which do impact our future, too. 


<describing Al Qaeda as "Islamo-BaaderMeinhof" would get you a big fat
"huh?" Remember "konsumterror"? Truly the missing legacy of the 70s.>

That's a great description for Al Qaeda!  Earlier you described the
"boomers" of the Chinese cultural revolution.  Careful not to impose
today's globalism on the "globe" of 1968.  Yes, in strict demographic,
population dynamics you can talk about the hippies, Chinese cultural
revolutionist, BaaderMeinof, all in the same "boomer" breath, but in
doing so you conflate your socio-historical perspective.  At a recent
academic conference, someone mentioned that there were two 1968's, the
1968 of San Francisco and the 1968 of Paris.  The
Haight-back-to-the-land hippie epitomized the former, while the
neo-Marxist radical student revolutionaries epitomized the latter.  The
German BaaderMeinof was an extreme example of Paris '68, not SF. 
Likewise, the New Leftist politicos in the US (Hoffman/Bernadine Dohrn)
bore more resemblance to the radicalized Paris of '68, than to the
Dionysian elements of the Haight (which they tried to co-opt).

At that conference, after this comment was made about SF/Paris,
someone asked, "what about the 1968 of Prague?"  Tianaman (sp) Square
(although later), as a reaction to a similar Marxist totalitarianism,
and more akin to the Prague Spring, than to the youthful disaffections
of Paris or SF.  

Likewise, if we're not going to conflate our history, shouldn't we
also point to Saigon 1968 as epitomizing the hugely significant
anti-colonial, Nationalist movement of the third world?  Ho Chi Minh
was a Nationalist more than a communist. The Tet Offensive of the
Vietnamese is best understood from this historical impetus.

SF/Paris/Prague/Saigon 1968 were like different winds blowing at the
same time. An historical perspective which doesn't conflate them all
into a singular boomer phenomena will help us better grasp a Global
future. Whatever our Global future, it will have been greatly
influenced by a convergence of all those different storms.


<People who talk about the failings of Boomers always talk about
hippie leftie druggie Boomers, but Bush is a Boomer, so is Gingrich, so
is Rove.  Most of the NeoCons are Boomers, except a few of their gray
emininences.>

Yes, but demographic conflation, again.  The wind of the once-called
"Silent Majority" began blowing hard in the US with Reagan in 1980. 
However, I've always thought that the term "Conservative Revolution"
coined by the Gingrich gang in 1994, was a great example of Orwellian
double speak.  The hippies had a consciousness revolution, the New
Leftists attempted neo-Marxist revolution, there was a revolution
starting with Prague '68 and culminating in '89 with the fall of the
Berlin Wall that overthrew the totalitarianism of Lenin's earlier
revolution.  By comparison, the Silent Majority of the US was
reactionary, never revolutionary.  The no-longer-silent-politicos in
the US were embracing the military-industrial status quo and harkening
back to an earlier Eisenhower Zeitgeist.         

<When it comes to seizing power and enforcing radical
change on society, Neoconservativism has pretty much gotta be the
Boomer philosophy par excellence.  Except maybe for Al Qaeda, because
Bin Laden's a Boomer, too.>

Neoconservatism is indeed radical, but, again, you're trying to fit
too much into your "Boomer" paradigm.  [I wish Neoconservativism were
merely "soppy".]   
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #91 of 116: Steve Bjerklie (stevebj) Mon 7 Jan 08 07:14

    
>>The wind of the once-called "Silent Majority" began blowing hard in
the US with Reagan in 1980.<<<

I'm not so sure, Scott. I don't have the voting data at hand, but my
sense has long been that Boomers got Reagan elected, not their parents.
A helluva lot of guys marched against the Vietnam War in the late
60s/early 70s just to get laid, you know. My speculation is that a few
years later they voted for Reagan. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #92 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 7 Jan 08 08:06

    
You may be right, Steve.  Which goes to show that "boomers" are simply
those born between a set of years.  For clarification, maybe 1980 is
when the silent majority (young and old) became unsilent.  There may
have always been a majority of "boomers" who were politically
conservative. George Wallace used to cater to the patriotic youth who
weren't out burning flags and raising hell. [Even the hardcore
back-to-the-land hippies were radically traditional.]


<<A helluva lot of guys marched against the Vietnam War in the late
60s/early 70s just to get laid>  

We should drag those infidels to Wall Street and burn them at the
stake. (Wait. A bunch of them are already there).
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #93 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Mon 7 Jan 08 10:23

    
bruces> In fact pretty much ALL AND EVERY aspect of popular
culture has suffered under the Bush Administration, but music,
especially so.

Umm, I totally disagree; THAT particular industry has THRIVED
under the little shrub; their problems of today they caused
themselves long ago!


bruces> Why should the Police, biggest band of the early 80s,
and the Beatles, biggest band of the 60s (with two dead guys
in it), kick the ass of musicians in the 00s?  

They don't! The music dinosaurs pack the stores with that old
dead rubbish and even with a hermetic market they are FAILING.

There are many large and thriving (culturally, not industrially)
music scenes. Hiphop has been topping sales for decades, utterly
ignored by a literally racist industry. Electronic dance music
is highly successful and wildly mutated and the artists involved
don't even fit in the model at all.

Here's one of those revealing factual details: the data in MP3
ID3 tags assumes the business model of

    band -> album -> song

whereas most DJ-produced releases are closer to 

    label -> DJ -> [ artist -> track; artist -> track; ...] 

where 'artist' can be another DJ, and 'label' can be one of the
big guys' "independent units" or an 'artist', and the overall
container ("disc") is itself made as a complete performance. 


Performance has been treated for years as a way to promote record
sales; this is reversing in many areas.  Was it David Byrne
who recently said "calling a record 'music' is like calling
a shopping cart 'groceries'.  Performance is again the unique
and valuable thing.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #94 of 116: NEAL SOLDOFSKY -- not (davadam) Mon 7 Jan 08 11:37

    
Neal Soldofsky comments from off-WELL:

regarding #86

I agree with you that is foolish to suggest that the internet is
bulletproof. When I said that the internet was too difficult to
control, I meant that if anyone made moves to limit what was great
about it, specifically the way it empowers people to distribute their
own media, people would freak out in a major way. I swear, there would
be riots. It'd be like trying to ban rock music. The kids would shit.
I'm sure that most ISP's have the ambition to ruin the internet, and
that plenty of politicians would consider letting them, but the kind of
public outcry you'd get would be too much. It's one thing to screw
with people's environment and country, it's another thing the screw
with their entertainment. And as the internet's importance in the realm
of popular entertainment grows, it's only going to get harder. 

But as it stands, I think it's safe to assume that the internet will
continue to fragment culture. That's the thing I'm most excited about
for the future. Not that I think this is going to necessarily improve
the quality of news for the average person. I do worry about the news.
I think more substantive news from more perspectives will be made
available, but I have no special reason to assume that most people will
seek it out. I have no ideas, really. How about the rest of yous? What
do you think is happening with the news? 

This is from Neal, by the way, not davadam. I'm emailing my comments
in.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #95 of 116: Lloyd Duhon (radioastro) Mon 7 Jan 08 15:19

    
To <BruceS> #88

"I never imagined I'd be the kinda guy who says "kids these days have
music that sucks."  In fact pretty much ALL AND EVERY aspect of
popular
culture has suffered under the Bush Administration, but music,
especially so."

Can you honestly give a president, ANY president this much credit?
Love them or hate them, just how much culture shift is the president
himself responsible for? 

To <JonL> #89

"Sale of recorded music is no longer a great way to make money - the
bands that are doing well make money by touring, and they have
hundreds of online channels to promote their music and their
performances."

*Do you consider this a negative? The fan is now closer to the artist.
The artist makes art, the fan pays homage. The bureaucracy involved in
the whole middleman process is constantly diminished. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #96 of 116: NEAL SOLDOFSKY -- not (davadam) Mon 7 Jan 08 16:16

    
Neal Soldofsky comments from off-WELL:

Regarding #88

Music does not suck these days. Just the best selling music, and even
all of it. Anything produced my Timbaland is a marvel, in my opinion.
And that includes Justin Timerlake's 'I'm Bringing Sexy Back'. A very
stupid song, but well done. But that's not what I really mean to talk
about. There's great music all over the place if you look for it. I
bought a ton of great albums last year. 

Kings of Leon - Because of the Times
Devendra Banhart - Smokey Rolls Down Thunder Canyon
Dan Deacon - Spiderman of the Rings
Animal Collective - Strawberry Jam
Noah Georgeson - Find Shelter
Arctic Monkeys - Favorite Worst Nightmare 

That's just a few. There are tons of great bands and a ton of great
records. There just isn't an over overwhelmingly large audience for any
one band. That doesn't worry me. The oughts don't need a Beatles or an
Elvis. I'm not worried for the future of music, because all the
members of my favorite bands are still alive. 

burces > The Bush regime is a grim, dispirited period. Everybody knows
there's something wrong with it.

wasn't there something wrong with the eighties? I'm a young man, and I
don't get much a sense from my peers that they are dispirited. Sure,
their parents are dispirited, but not the kids. And the kids are making
a lot joyful music right now (evidence:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b_vl5vcG9VI  )
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #97 of 116: Tom Jennings (t-o-m-i-c) Mon 7 Jan 08 17:58

    
(My apologies to jonl for overlooking his post re: music.)

So music got itself vastly vertically integrated with a handful of
distribution channels carrying 90% or whatever of the bulk;
radio/tv/print has more nearly done the same. Food is largely done the
same. (Talking US here, sorry.) Some things (oddly, vitamin food
additives) are already global cartels.

So this meta-business with the near ability to aggregate at this level
-- this seems novel (and not in a good way). It's kinda sorta like
monopoly, but not really since the "individual" players are not all one
legal entity.

Bruce an Gibson wrote about this stuff.

Will THAT meta-mechanism continue? The EU has stopped a lot of that
American toxic financial mechanism from importing, but is there
anything "natural" (sic) to stop it? Does it need stopping or limits?
How to we not end up in the world of  Rollerball?
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #98 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 08 20:13

    
>>>
"Sale of recorded music is no longer a great way to make money - the
bands that are doing well make money by touring [etc]"

*Do you consider this a negative?
<<<

Not at all - not sure how I gave that impression.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #99 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 08 04:07

    
"Careful not to impose
today's globalism on the "globe" of 1968.  Yes, in strict demographic,
population dynamics you can talk about the hippies, Chinese cultural
revolutionist, BaaderMeinof, all in the same "boomer" breath, but in
doing so you conflate your socio-historical perspective.  At a recent
academic conference, someone mentioned that there were two 1968's, the
1968 of San Francisco and the 1968 of Paris.  The
Haight-back-to-the-land hippie epitomized the former, while the
neo-Marxist radical student revolutionaries epitomized the latter. 
The
German BaaderMeinof was an extreme example of Paris '68, not SF. 
Likewise, the New Leftist politicos in the US (Hoffman/Bernadine
Dohrn)
bore more resemblance to the radicalized Paris of '68, than to the
Dionysian elements of the Haight (which they tried to co-opt).

"At that conference, after this comment was made about SF/Paris,
someone asked, "what about the 1968 of Prague?" 

(((Yeah, what a good question.  I wanted to figure that one out
myself.)))

<p> Tianaman (sp) Square
(although later), as a reaction to a similar Marxist totalitarianism,
and more akin to the Prague Spring, than to the youthful disaffections
of Paris or SF.  

<p>Likewise, if we're not going to conflate our history, shouldn't we
also point to Saigon 1968 as epitomizing the hugely significant
anti-colonial, Nationalist movement of the third world?  (((etc etc)))

*Y'know, that was just great.  I enjoyed that.  I admit cheerily that
I was conflating, while s-mcfarlane there was disambiguating...  Kinda
the systole and diastole of historical analysis, really.

*I could read stuff like that all day, and often do.

*About the best I can offer here is to say that the farther one gets
historically, the more the facts on the ground tend to compost.  If you
zoom in all close to the Great '68 Rebellion, you'd get guys howling
stuff like "hey, Prague, Paris, San Francisco, what about Port Huron?" 
Historians always end up conflating, as you can't establish meaning
without pruning the thicket of facts.

There's an alarming paucity of facts about the Dark Ages.  I always
wonder what was really going on there.  Presumably they were
pig-ignorant and puttering along on subsistence agriculture for about
400 years, but who knows, maybe they were radically enlighted
sustainable green communes and nobody was bothering to write that down.

  
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #100 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 08 04:25

    
"I never imagined I'd be the kinda guy who says "kids these days have
music that sucks."  In fact pretty much ALL AND EVERY aspect of
popular culture has suffered under the Bush Administration, but music,
especially so."

"Can you honestly give a president, ANY president this much credit?
Love them or hate them, just how much culture shift is the president
himself responsible for?"

*Y'know, before Bush, I would have been all socially-determinate about
that and said "not much," but after having that guy as my governor for
two terms and President for two terms, yeah, he's frankly disastrous. 
He was a true calamity for American civil society.  I hope our
democracy never elects a dimwitted aristocrat again.

*That doesn't explain why Britain has failed to launch
earth-shattering pop music to make up for the lack in America.  I could
make a case that they did better than the US did.


Kings of Leon - Because of the Times (Tennessee)
Devendra Banhart - Smokey Rolls Down Thunder Canyon (weird
Texan-Venezuelan-Angeleno)
Dan Deacon - Spiderman of the Rings (some guy from Baltimore I've
frankly never heard of, maybe he's bigger than Elvis)
Animal Collective - Strawberry Jam  (also from Baltimore, bidding fair
to be the San Francisco of the 00s, presumably)
Noah Georgeson - Find Shelter  (Devendra's producer)
Arctic Monkeys - Favorite Worst Nightmare   (Brits)

*I've got nothing against these guys, but I'd call them cult figures. 
  They seem content to lurk underground without producing the kind of
artistic work that demands public attention.

*It might be that in cheerier times public attention goes and finds
musicians.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #101 of 116: Lloyd Duhon (radioastro) Tue 8 Jan 08 04:47

    
"It might be that in cheerier times public attention goes and finds
musicians."

Perhaps. However, the public seemed to embrace music heavily in the
Vietnam era, and that was hardly a cheery time for our nation. Music
from that time really speaks to the clash of culture that was
occurring. 

My belief about music and art in general is that it is becoming more
personal in nature. It's a cyclic thing where we are going back to a
more traditional artist <--> fan relationship. Years of integration
have changed the definition of a success from "an artist pleases his
fan base" to "An artist is successful if they sell a million copies of
something". I think it's headed back in the other direction now. 

Artists are able to reach their fans directly now, and judge their
success by the effect that they have on their fans. Perhaps that is why
some of the above referenced artists seem more cult like? 

Before the Internet, they could have been successful to a very local
(geographic) crowd at a pub somewhere. Today they can be successful to
a very local (musical interest) crowd at a website somewhere. If that
feeds the artist, and perhaps a small ecosystem around him, you've got
the best of both worlds, a commune like cultural gathering and a
commercial success, all rolled into one convenient URL.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #102 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 08 04:54

    
"What's your take on this Bruce? How do you think the internet will
affect news and the way people consume it? Do you think people will be
more or less informed?"

*Y'know, I once heard it said about the Internet that "the
architectural is political," and as soon as I heard that, I thought,
yeah: these seemingly arcane technical decisions are not value-neutral,
they really have consequence.  It would be a good idea if I spent a
lot of energy studying these.

*That was quite a while ago; nowadays every graduate with an MBA ggets
it about hacking intellectual property, knifing the baby, cutting off
the oxygen and busting up the value chain.  So we have a rather cruel
and decadent Internet now, full of barbed-wire, pirates and spammers,
but at least that put the kibosh on the notion that the Internet is
some kind of lucent immaterial cyberspatial noosphere.

*I also heard it said -- by the same guy, I think -- that "Point of
view is worth 80 IQ points."  Which means to say that informing people
more doesn't necessarily help their situation.  

*When I visited Russia, I used to ask people, in my harmless,
blinky-eyed, American-journalist way -- "what seems to be the problem
here?"  And I was amazed by the sophistication of the responses that
poured out of them.  Of course they knew their country wasn't a "normal
country"  -- the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics wasn't even a
country, it was supposed to be some weird Marxist melange of soviets
and republics -- but I was stunned how "well-informed" they were.

They hadn't been "kept in the dark" -- they were all "enlightened."
Really, they had conspiracy theories that made the most vigorous
American conspiracy theories look like a pile of children's blocks.  It
was incredible how thoroughly and footnoted these ideas were, they
were like private theologies.  

But I never found two Russians with the same weltanschauung.  They'd
garnered up amazing idiosyncratic cobbled and mosaic'ed worldviews,
they were scholarly, deeply read and very thoughtful, but, frankly,
they were so well-informed they were helpless.  REALLY helpless --
like, seven Russians couldn't divide themselves up into two taxis.

If there's an American equivalent to these cerebral Russians -- I
dunno.  Maybe Ron Paul enthusiasts.  I never met two of 'em who wanted
to vote for Ron Paul for the same reason.  Paulists are brimming over
with heartfelt conviction at the same moment that they lack any
practical plan for governance.  

I mean, Ron Paul is a Texan crank extremist who makes even Mike
Huckabee, a Baptist preacher from Arkansas, look with-it and
street-level.  Ron Paul is the kind of utterly unworldly guy whom, if
you found him drunk in a Russian bar, you'd try to help him home
because he was so likely to freeze to death.

These Paulunteers are way Russian because they are Internet hacker
trivia freaks. They're incredibly "well-informed," yet they're so
poorly-socialized that their lack of common-sense inspires pity.

I dunno what to conclude from  this; except that the Russians finally
found their savior.  They got their Franklin Roosevelt.  He's kind of a
dictator, and he'd poison a man with polonium, or break up an
opposition party or newspaper, the way you or I would blow out a burnt
match. 

 The Russians are finally united -- in the conviction that this Putin
guy is just tops.  Their doubts and qualms are resolved and they
believe they're swimming in chocolate.

Go figure.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #103 of 116: Steve Bjerklie (stevebj) Tue 8 Jan 08 04:55

    
>>>"It might be that in cheerier times public attention goes and finds
musicians."<<<

Heh. The cheery Kennedy years -- "Camelot" -- produced some of the
worst pop music ever recorded. The oppressive Boss Pendergast era in
Kansas City was a time of some of the best jazz ever. The Reagan era?
The period when rap and hip-hop was in amazing ferment. 

The relationship between a political administration and what's going
on in popular music is tenuous, if it exists at all. You give too much
credit to Bush, <bruces>. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #104 of 116: Lloyd Duhon (radioastro) Tue 8 Jan 08 05:02

    
"Not at all - not sure how I gave that impression."

You didn't give a negative impression. I was unsure which direction
you were taking the point, so I asked for clarification purposes only. 
My faulty communication there, I was too brief in my question.

I believe that this is the best direction artists could go in. It both
widens and deepens the playing field, allowing many new forms of
artistic expression to reach the audience that would gain enjoyment
from it. 

It will be interesting to continue watch the myriad changes coming
from all of these disruptions in the business models for creative
industries over the next few years. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #105 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 08 06:48

    
>>>"It might be that in cheerier times public attention goes and finds
musicians."<<<

Heh. The cheery Kennedy years -- "Camelot" -- produced some of the
worst pop music ever recorded. The oppressive Boss Pendergast era in
Kansas City was a time of some of the best jazz ever. The Reagan era?
The period when rap and hip-hop was in amazing ferment. 

The relationship between a political administration and what's going
on in popular music is tenuous, if it exists at all. You give too much
credit to Bush, <bruces>. 


*Well, could be; I'd never claim there was a meatgrinder crank for
producing human creativity.  I can't even tell when I'm gonna write a
short story.  About the one thing I can tell you is that the spavined
mechanics of short-story marketing and distribution systems don't have
much to do with it.

*Maybe we'll get brilliant political leadership in the next four years
(as if) and yet popular music will vanish from the face of the earth. 
It'll be back to playing banjos on the front porch for the delectation
of our friends.

*Can anyone confirm for me that the son of Sarkozy is a French hip-hop
producer?  If so, what with him and Carla Bruni, that's quite the
musical family... at least as presidential right-wingers go.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #106 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 08 06:57

    
"The Russians are finally united -- in the conviction that this Putin
guy is just tops.  Their doubts and qualms are resolved and they
believe they're swimming in chocolate."

When you're thrown into complete chaos for a while, I suppose you can
take the polonium with the chocolate and breathe a sigh of relief that
somebody's got your back. To those he protects, the godfather is part
god, part father. 30 years ago, I would've sneered dismissal at this
sort of fealty as "undemocratic." Now I know that "democracy" is
impractical, probably impossible. It's comforting to believe that some
guy is making viable decisions, even if he's deeply flawed. We'll
accept "honest graft," but when the leader's draining the coffers and
breaching communal ethics, that's another story.

(#105 slipped in while I was posting.)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #107 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 8 Jan 08 08:50

    
*Y'know, that was just great.  I enjoyed that.  I admit cheerily that
I was conflating, while s-mcfarlane there was disambiguating...  Kinda
the systole and diastole of historical analysis, really.


Hey, I try to stay cheery, meself, Bruce. My blood pressure won't go
up a tick, so long as you don't obviate those hairshirted greenies. 
;=)
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #108 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 8 Jan 08 13:15

    
<< (from Neal Soldofsky) 
When I said that the internet was too difficult to
control, I meant that if anyone made moves to limit what was great
about it, specifically the way it empowers people to distribute their
own media, people would freak out in a major way. I swear, there would
be riots. It'd be like trying to ban rock music. The kids would shit.
I'm sure that most ISP's have the ambition to ruin the internet, and
that plenty of politicians would consider letting them, but the kind
of public outcry you'd get would be too much. It's one thing to screw
with people's environment and country, it's another thing the screw
with their entertainment. And as the internet's importance in the
realm of popular entertainment grows, it's only going to get harder.>>



Sadly, I think your prediction is accurate here, Neal.  Bush can lock
people up for six years and deny them Habeas Corpus or any due process
of law; start a war under dubious pretenses that is now lasting nearly
a long as WWI & WWII combined; sanction more media consolidation of
those with the resources to fully report the "news"; allow his neocon
"base" of military-industrial supporters to plunder our treasury;
sanction unprecedented government spying on our own people, but the
level of protest is relatively minimal.  But screw with our internet
entertainment and wholesale rioting will result.  Entertainment has
become the absorptive panacea for individual apathy and alienation. 
Talk about the numbed indifference of our postmodern condition.

  
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #109 of 116: Steve Bjerklie (stevebj) Tue 8 Jan 08 13:31

    
(>>>now lasting nearly a long as WWI & WWII combined<<<   In terms of
U.S. involvement in those wars -- 1917-18, 1941-45 -- yes. In terms of
the actual wars, not yet -- 1914-1918, 1939-1945.) 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #110 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 08 15:01

    
boing boing readers are commenting on our conversation at
http://www.boingboing.net/2008/01/03/bruce-sterling-publi.html, if
anyone here wants to comment on their comments. I love the anonymoose
who says this is all "boring cliches, nothing useful."

"Bush can lock people up [etc].... But screw with our internet
entertainment and wholesale rioting will result.  Entertainment has
become the absorptive panacea for individual apathy and alienation."

I think you're overstating your conclusion... I'm not seeing apathy
and alienation. I'm seeing real outrage, even among Republicans. On the
other hand, there may be Forces at work that are beyond the politics
of nations... it's not clear to me that any amount of activism at mere
mortal/citizen level can make a huge difference. Eager to see what
happens over the next 12-15 months.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #111 of 116: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 8 Jan 08 15:22

    
<there may be Forces at work that are beyond the politics
of nations... it's not clear to me that any amount of activism at mere
mortal/citizen level can make a huge difference.>

There are definitely forces at work beyond the politics of
nations...follow the money trail.  I agree with you that, at the
individual level, we are largely irrelevant, hence the apathy and
alienation (which may or may not be overstated).  

I guess this leads us to the earlier points made by Bruce that, to
solve our major global problems/crises, the scale of the solutions will
be huge and need to be delivered quickly.  Unless it's perceived to be
in the interest of the powerful nation-states and multi-national
corporations to affect such change, we will be in a heap of trouble
when that day comes.



 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #112 of 116: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 08 00:45

    
Well, after a calm week of the holidays, Torino is jolting back to
giddy life.  I'm posting this on hired wi-fi at the airport,
where I'm awaiting a guest.  Then a design scheme with some
local wi-max advocates, and a bookstore appearance to support
a local blogging-culture enthusiast... and after that it
starts getting BUSY.

After so many years of this, I've learned to leave the mike
when people are still talking.  I hope we're all hear again
in 2009.  I also hope that we're describing an entirely
new state of the world that is practically unrecognizable.

Ciao for now

bruces
http://blog.wired.com/sterling
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #113 of 116: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 9 Jan 08 02:47

    
I'll have some of that chow, too, if you pass it over this way.,,

Hasta la pasta!

jonl
http://weblogsky.com
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #114 of 116: Autumn (autumn) Wed 9 Jan 08 07:59

    
Thanks, guys. I haven't posted in this topic, but I've enjoyed reading it.
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #115 of 116: Cynthia Dyer-Bennet (cdb) Wed 9 Jan 08 08:58

    

Thanks so much for joining us once again, Bruce. The past week has gone by
so fast, and you've left us with a lot to ponder. And thank you, Jon, for
once again being our moderator for this annual conversation. 
  

inkwell.vue.317 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2008
permalink #116 of 116: Gail Williams (gail) Wed 9 Jan 08 18:05

    

Love all the interesting perceptions zipping past one another in this
conversation.  Plenty to reflect on.

Thanks, Bruce and Jon. These annual events are a blast.
  

