inkwell.vue.343 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World, 2009
## 0 of 177: What is going to amuse our bouches now? (bumbaugh) Wed 31 Dec 08 10:00

    
As has become our custom, the new year in the Inkwell begins with a visit
from longtime Well member, Bruce Sterling. This will be Bruce's tenth
overview of Things in General, the State of the World, Where We Have Been
and Where We are Tending.

Bruce Sterling, author, journalist, editor, and critic, was born in 1954.
Best known for his nine science fiction novels, he also writes design
criticism. He is a contributing editor of WIRED magazine and a columnist for
MAKE magazine. He also writes a weblog.

During 2005, he was the "Visionary in Residence" at Art Center College of
Design in Pasadena.  In 2008 he was the Guest Curator for the Share Festival
in Torino, Italy and also "Visionary in Residence" and the Sandberg
Instituut in Amsterdam.

Jon Lebkowsky is Bruce's regular partner in these highly informed
speculations.

Jon is a cultural strategist, social commentator, and web strategist. He
writes about culture, technology, media, sustainability and other topics for
various publications, and has been blogging regularly since 2000. He's an
acknowledged authority on social media and online community. He is cofounder
of Social Web Strategies, where he does strategic consulting and coordinates
social media planning and web development.

In 1991 he cofounded the pioneering online company FringeWare, Inc., the
first company to attempt e-commerce. The company published the influential
magazine FringeWare Review, which had an international distribution. he was
involved in online community and e-commerce projects throughout the 1990s,
and worked with bOING bOING (as associate editor for the original paper
zine), HotWired, The Whole Earth Catalog, Electric Minds, and many other web
and cyberculture projects and endeavors during the World Wide Web's first
decade. In the late 90s, he was actively involved in the creation of e-
commerce and online community initiatives for Whole Foods Market. After
leaving Whole Foods, he formed Polycot Consulting, one of Austin's lead web
consulting and development companies through the 2000s. He was involved in
the emergence of social technology in the early 2000s, and has been a leader
in the use of social technology for political activism. With Mitch
Ratcliffe, he co-edited the book Extreme Democracy.

Gentlemen: ring out the old, won't you, please? Pretty please?
  
## 1 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 31 Dec 08 11:11

    
Hello to all, and thanks to Bruce Umbaugh for kicking this off. We should 
start with the economy - much confusion there. I'm hearing otherwise smart 
people say that this is just a down cycle, no big deal, we'll spin around and 
boom again before you know it. I don't see how anyone can confuse this with 
business as usual. And I don't think it's about a few blithering crooks and a 
festering rash of bad decisions. Feels more like paradigms shifting and, 
while shifting, some are collapsing. How does this look to you, especially 
from your global suitcase perspective?
  
## 2 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 1 Jan 09 04:03

    
Do we HAVE to talk about the economy this year?  I'm wondering what
conceivable event could overshadow the fiscal crisis.  Maybe a cozy
little nuclear war?

An Indo-Pakistani nuclear war might conceivably take a *back page* to
the fiscal crisis.

I always knew the "War on Terror" bubble would go.  It's gone. Nobody
misses it.  It got no burial.  I knes was gonna be replaced by another
development that seemed much more burningly urgent than terror Terror
TERROR, but I had a hard time figuring out what vast, abject fright
that might be.

Now I know.  Welcome to 2009!

What I now currently wonder is: what kind of OTHER development makes
us stop maundering about liquidity issues?  You know what's truly weird
about any financial crisis? WE MADE IT UP.  Currency, money, finance,
they're all social inventions.  When the sun comes up in the morning
it's shining on the same physical landscape, all the atoms are in
place.  It's not merciless enemies would blow themselves up in order to
bleed on our shoes... oh wait.  They are.  Well, it's not like the
icecaps are melting.

Oh wait.  The icecaps ARE melting.  Okay, maybe I'll start over next
post.
  
## 3 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 09 08:21

    
A collapse of the Internet could be daunting - worse for me than collapse of 
the abstract economy. (The alternative currency/next economy thinkers have 
convinced me that less abstract, perfectly viable forms of exchange are 
waiting in the wings.) 

Are we growing more or less prone to hostility and war? Reading the letter
from Gaza that Jasmina Tesanovic posted: "Nowhere is safe anymore."
http://budurl.com/3cmm

A post-economy USA seems cozy by comparison.
  
## 4 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 1 Jan 09 09:38

    
I'm a bohemian type, so I could scarcely be bothered to do anything
"financially sound" in my entire adult life.  Last year was the first
year when I've felt genuinely sorry for responsible, well-to-do people.
 Suddenly they've got the precariousness of creatives, of the
underclass, without that gleeful experience of decades spent
living-it-up.

These are people who obeyed the social contract and are *still*
getting it in the neck.  The injustice of that upsets me.  The
bourgeoisie who kept their noses clean and obeyed the rules, I never
had anything against them.  I mean, of course I made big artsy fun of
them, one has to do that, but I never meant them any active harm.  I
didn't scheme to raise a black flag and cut their throats because they
were consumers. 

I even fret about the bankers.  Seventeen percent of the US works in
financial services.  That's a lot.  I've got friends and relatives who
work in those industries.  I frankly enjoy tossing myself into
turbulent parts of life, because I'm a dilettante who bores easily, but
jeez, bankers are supposed to be the ultimate humorless brown-shoe
crowd.  They're not supposed to wake up on a sleeping roll and scrounge
breakfast.

If the straights were not "prone to hostility" before that experience,
they might well be so after it, because they've got a new host of
excellent reasons.  The sheer galling come-down of watching the Bottom
Line, the Almighty Dollar, revealed as a papier-mache pinata.  It's
like somebody burned their church.

 I keep remembering the half-stunned, half-irritated looks on the
faces of those car execs when they were chided for flying their company
jets to Washington to beg.  I felt sorrow for them.  Truly.  These
guys are the captains of American industry at the top of the food
chain.  Of course they fly corporate jets.  Corporate jets were
*invented* for guys like the board of General Motors.  And now they're
getting skewered for that by a bunch of punk-ass Congressmen they can
usually buy and sell?  

*That's* the issue at stake, a few jets?  General Motors built the
aviation industry in World War II.  General Motors aircraft pounded
Nazi Germany into a flaming ruin.   Here they get this off-the-wall,
total-hokum act of peanut-gallery gotcha humiliation about the
corporate airplanes they've used for fifty years.  That must have felt
surreal, even nauseating.

There are going to be so many nettling, humiliating experiences for
similar people, people congenitally unable to laugh at themselves and
roll with the punches.  Nowhere is safe any more, not even the
mirrorglass skyscraper, not even the boardroom.  

I wish I could make them feel safe, but since I've lived in parts of
the planet with no-kidding, real-deal economic collapse...  I dunno,
does reading Dmitri Orlov feel safe?  I love that guy's writing, I
really get it about him, but the prophets of doom have so little
comfort to offer people.  Last thing I heard about Orlov the guy had
chucked it and was living on a small boat.
  
## 5 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 09 13:28

    
I have to love a guy who talks about a "collapse gap." He's got a blog called
"ClubOrlov" at http://cluborlov.blogspot.com/, and in his intro to a guest
post on December 23, he says " I called it as I saw it, and, unfortunately, I 
seem to have called it correctly. The US is collapsing before our eyes. Stage 
1 collapse is very advanced now; stages 2 and 3 are picking up momentum." 

In 2005 he wrote advice on "Thriving in the Age of Collapse."  
http://docs.google.com/View?docid=dtxqwqr_19gjjvp8 I wonder if he would 
advise differently today?

Your last Viridian note had advice, not necessarily for "thriving" during a 
"collapse" - more general, but probably also useful in lean times. You wrote 
that piece in November, as the shit hit the fan. Anything to add?
  
## 6 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Thu 1 Jan 09 21:37

    
Amazing Filtered Things <http://amazingfiltered.blogspot.com/> has 
published several photosets of post-collapse Russia.  This one from 
October, '07 is the most recent I could find...

http://amazingfiltered.blogspot.com/2007/10/russia-as-is-photos.html
  
## 7 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 09 02:38

    
*Yeah, I've got plenty to add on that topic.  I'm probably gonna be
adding on that topic for the next ten years.

*I scarcely know where to start.  Actually, I think I *do* know where
to start, with an ambitious new Internet project.  Weirdly, I can't
make the time to get there from here.  Because I'm snowed under with
work.  I never had such a busy December. Never.  Apparently they all
stopped shopping and started demanding that I write magazine articles. 
I'm still not done.  I've got two deadlines this week, plus this WELL
thing.

*I'm sure this beats sleeping in my car while waiting for my real
estate career to recommence -- I mean, of course it's nice to be
busy... but what if the *rest of my life* looks like this?   What if
this is the New Normal?  Will I ever get a minute's peace to think
seriously about the Big Issues?  

Maybe Orlov needs a deckhand.
  
## 8 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 09 02:49

    
*Americans -- and Orlov's an American now, he's much too relaxed and
funny to be a Russian -- love to imagine that America leads the
collapse.  If we're not the Shining City on the Hill, we've at least
got to be the Smoldering Wreckage on the Hill.  You know: as long as
we're always the Hill.

*People with loose money still think we're the Hill.  That's why all
the loose change is moving into Treasury bonds.  I mean, if you buy
China, you're basically buying US Treasury Bonds anyway...  Japan is
old and gray and has no rate of return... Rich Europeans can't take
Europe seriously.  They're afraid it will turn into an actual empire
instead of their toy trading bloc, so they're always parking their cash
somewhere far outside their own legal jurisdiction...  

So what does that leave you, if you've got a spare 50 billion? 
Brazil?  Russia?  India, for heaven's sake?  What kind of rich person
preserves his wealth in INDIA?  You'd have to be crazy.  Should you buy
oil?  Oil's got blood all over it and it's skyrocketing up and down.

So that leaves the Americans -- the global wealthy are clinging to 'em
like a drunk to a lamppost.  When Russia collapsed, every Russian with
a shred of wealth shipped it to Cyprus and Switzerland.  The Americans
 don't have a place to offshore their money.  They can offshore their
LABOR, that's dead easy, but their money?  If the American dollar goes,
finance as an industry gets the blue screen of death.
  
## 9 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 09 03:14

    
*These posts are making the New Year situation look blacker than I
think it is, so maybe I should raise the cogent issue of self-reliance
and "resilient cities."  I notice that John Robb, one of my favorite
prophets of doom, has formed some tacit New Urbanist alliance with
James Howard Kunstler, also one of my favorite prophets of doom.  

This would be John "Global Guerrillas" Robb and James Howard "Long
Emergency" Kunstler, for those of you entering the catastrophe
sweepstakes late in the game.  If you've never read these guys before,
you might want to take a walk around the block before Googling 'em, as
otherwise your heart might stop.

In any case, after eight glum years of watching Bush and his neocons
methodically wreck the Republic, both Kunstler and Robb have gotten
really big on American localism -- "resilient" localism.  Kunstler has
this painterly, small-town-America, Thoreauvian thing going on, kinda
locavore voluntary simplicity, with lots of time for... I dunno, group 
chorale singing.  Kunstler seems kinda hung up on the singing effort,
somehow...  Whereas Robb has a military background and is more into a
gated-community, bug-out-bag, militia rapid-response thing.

Certainly neither of these American visions look anything like what
happened to Russia.  As Orlov accurately points out, in the Russian
collapse, if you were on a farm or in some small neighborly town, you
were toast.  The hustlers in the cities were the ones with inventive
opportunities, so they were the ones getting by.  

So the model polity for local urban resilience isn't Russia.  I'm
inclined to think the model there is Italy.  Italy has had calamitous
Bush-levels of national incompetence during almost its entire 150-year
national existence. 

 Before that time, Italy was all city-states -- and not even "states,"
mostly just cities.  Florence, Milan, Genoa, Venice.  Rome.  They were
really brilliantly-run, powerful cities.  (Well, not Rome -- but Rome
was global.)   Gorgeous cities full of initiaive and inventive genius. 
If you're a fan of urbanism you've surely got to consider the cities
of the Italian Renaissance among the top urban inventions of all time.

And cities do seem in many ways to respond much better to
globalization than nation-states do.  When a city's population
globalizes, when it becomes a global marketplace, if it can keep the
local peace and order, it booms.  London, Paris, New York, Toronto,
they've never been more polyglot and multiethnic. 

 In my futurist book  TOMORROW NOW I was speculating that there might
be a post-national global new order arising in cities.  Cities as
laboratories of the post-Westphalian order.

However...  okay, never mind the downside yet.  Let's just predict
that in 2009 we're gonna see a whole lot of contemporary urbanism going
on.  Digital cities.  Cities There For You to Use.  Software for
cities.  Googleable cities.  Cities with green power campaigns. 
Location-aware cities.  Urban co-ops. "Informal housing." 
"Architecture fiction."  The ruins of the unsustainable as the new
frontier.  

A President from Chicago who carried the ghettos and barrios by
massive margins.  Gotta mean something, I figure.
  
## 10 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 09 05:02

    
I was on a call recently with a business that produces "resilient
cities" planning, database-intensive digital planning. We also
organized a meeting of local activists to talk about the potential to
form an alternative currency, and there was a lot of energy in the
room. With a little discipline that energy could flow somewhere.
There's a bunch of examples of alt.currency:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alternative_currency#Examples_of_alternative_currencies.
My sense was that liquidity crisis seemed so entirely possible that
community leaders wanted to have a fallback medium of exchange waiting
in the wings.

On the other hand, I've met with local business people who are saying
that there's no imminent crisis, the economy's really okay, this is
just another cycle of recession. They say the idea of "collapse" or
depression or even strong recession is driven by media. Nothing sells
papers, but panic still sells whatever passes for media these days -
page views. Not sure how many clickthroughs they're getting from
Americans who're convinced their jobs are in jeopardy - if they still
have jobs.

So we have a weird state of whimper vs bang, and a whole army of
traditional business people in denial, while the alt.culture folks are
out their planning, and planting corn in their backyards.
  
## 11 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 09 05:34

    
Administrivia: if you want to pass the url for this talk around,
here's a shortened version: http://budurl.com/sterlingworld

This conversation is scheduled to last two weeks. If you're not a
member of the WELL but have a comment or question, send to inkwell [at]
well.com. Our hosts can post it here.

If you're talking about this conversation on Twitter, use this
hashtag: #stateworld09.
  
## 12 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Fri 2 Jan 09 09:47

    
Short term, I think the economy will rebound.  Long term, we're in for
changes that won't be denied, and the longer we try to put them off the
harder they're going to hit us when they do arrive.
  
## 13 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Fri 2 Jan 09 10:13

    
Good to see you here again, Bruce! 

I've been thinking a great deal lately about the difference between
globalization and global consciousness.  Globalization is an economic
phenomenon with more efficient deliveries of commerce worldwide that
largely supercedes the political nation-state.  A global consciousness 
relates more to an emerging ethos that encourages us, as technological
apes, to be more aware of how our collective behavior impacts our
sustainability on the planet.

Of course, the City-States are important economic foci on earth, but
they are greatly benefiting like never before from an information age
that has created a global web of communication and commerce.  When you
talk about rich Europeans parking their money in American dollars, or
gray old Japan, or the bloody oil money, you're identifying some of the
players in the game, but only somewhat placing them as players on the
big gameboard.

I think you are correct that, in many ways, the Nation-State
configuration is less and less relevant, but if we allow ourselves to
buy into the fragmentation of postmodernity, where positionality,
diversity and ennui rule the day, we lose sight that there are big,
tangible players who have the power to behave in ways with their
political clout, capital, manufacturing and commerce that are either
earth-friendly or not earth-friendly.  For example, if in 2098 most of
us are driving solar-juiced cars that max out at 58 mph, the species
will be fine.  It might mean less bloody oil wars, much smaller
environmental transportation impacts, money (R.O.I.) still to be made
by those manufacturers/investors, and jobs as usual for Joe and Jane
commuter.

I'd like to think that in the midst of the paradigm shift you address,
we are seeing the emergence of a new zeitgeist.  I see this as a
consciousness that is moving away from the weary morass of
postmodernity where we throw up our hands, resigned to the behaviors of
the oily Geo. W Bushes, the self-indulgent, billionaire Europeans, and
the eco-monster manufacturers in third world countries.  Instead, I
hope we will approach a critical mass in the populace where we
persistently insist––politically, economically, spiritually––that our
business and government leaders adopt behaviors that embrace a new
global consciousness. Namely, globalization can be "governed" with
larger planetary and human interests in mind.

If we are to be hopeful (rather than resigned to the inevitability of
collapse where humans are inherently predisposed to shitting in their
own well), don't we need to believe that awareness might be coming full
circle in terms of seeing and acting collectively as responsible
denizens on earth.  For example, included in the characteristic spirit
of the counterculture were ideals for a consciousness
revolution––honoring mother earth, we-can-change-the-world, the oneness
of being, conscientious consumption, appropriate technology, and world
peace.  I see the characteristic spirit of these beliefs as now
shaping the ethos of this emerging global consciousness. As survival
pressures increase, we will become resourcefully more green by
necessity.

Bottom line, I am saying that with more collective outcry, higher
expectations for our VERY IDENTIFIABLE power moguls on this planet, and
an insistence of greater adherence to an ethos of sustainability for
all the big players, we need not treat global collapse (economically or
environmentally) as the inevitable fate of humanity.        


 
  
## 14 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 09 11:08

    
Well, I have to doubt that we're all left-wing green yeoman peasantry
by next Christmas. But we won't be stricken cannibals gnawing each
other's thighbones, either.

As for local currencies -- what, hot-pink San Francisco rubles?  Yeah,
maybe.

Cellphone banking is happening now among Third Worlders who never saw
a bank in their lives -- forgotten people who'd be spat upon by
conventional bankers.  Their need for money is so dire that even
rapacious cellphone outfits look good to them.

There are two major kinds of poor in this world: people inherently
incapable of generating value for others, and people who are KEPT from
making any money by oppressive systems that don't serve their
interests.  You don't have to be a Marxist to see that this second
problem is a major issue for everybody now.  

The shattered banks are making honest, industrious, capable people go
broke.  It's not that we created some over-complex loan vehicles, and
things would be great if we returned to the limpid honest of the Gold
Standard.  That's idea is wingnut hokum.   Money is always a social
invention. Money is never simple or natural.  Money always has winners
and losers.

The problem with these booming cellphone banking systems -- thriving
in places like Kenya -- is that they are stealth operations.  If the
local kakistocracy caught on that the Little People were actually
making money, they'd drive by in a Mercedes Benz to beat and shoot
them.  Improving things by  stealth has limits.  Kenya isn't like Kenya
by accident.

The same goes for Americans trying to rebel against Wall Street. 
There's no visible other space.  There's no liberated territory.  It's
like rebelling against a funhouse mirror because it makes you look so
fat and stupid.  

I get it about the Phil Gramm argument that one should always put up a
brave front in big troubles.  So Americans are a lame bunch of
crybabies...  I guess the Americans ought to put up with the savage
loss of their comforts, privileges, prerogatives and civil rights, and
let the likes of Phil get on with the everyday plunder.  

But dude, this is not just a bad vibe happening.   Merrill Lynch is
gone. Enron is long gone.  Madoff is a crook.  The big boys are
hurting.  Cities are broke, states are broke, the feds are a
laughingstock.  The Congress and the former Administration have fully
earned the public's contempt.  You can't "blame the media" for that. 
Even the media's broke -- ESPECIALLY the media.    You can't pull a
Reagan, triple the national debt and pretend that everything's jolly.

I agree that there's an irrational panic now.  There are also a large
crowd of severe, real-world, fully rational, deeply structural problems
that have gone unconfronted for years.  These problems are not
directly responsible for the money panic, but the blatant neglect there
has created an atmosphere of crisis. 

The Iraq War was a harebrained adventure that wrecked the
international community.  And to what end?  The War on Terror is a
bust: stateless terror is the new status quo.  

Huge demographic changes in the world have not been confronted.  Why
are the victors of World War II still the so-called Security Council?  
What real security are they providing most living people today?   

The planet's population is aging.  Contemporary Italy looks like a
Florida retirement city.  And it's not just the rich white guys who
forgot to have kids -- Mexico is also rapidly aging, and China has
one-child families.  We lack the financial capacity to allow retirement
funds to run the world.  We can't have ninety-year-old rentiers who
are rich when young people can't go to college.  That doesn't compute.

Then there's energy.  I'm not a Peak Oil guy, but of course wild
turbulence in energy prices is gonna put people on edge.  How can any
person of reasonable prudence invest, plan and build with that kind of
uncertainty?   

Last, and slowest, and worst, there's the climate.  The planet's
entire atmosphere is polluted.  Practically everything we do in our
civilization is directly predicated on setting fire to dead stuff. 
Climate change is a major evil.  It's vast in scope and it's
everywhere.  The climate crisis would be a major issue even for a
technically with-it bright-green secular Utopia, where every single
citizen was an MIT grad.  Of course our world looks nothing like that. 
 Nor will it.

The people fighting climate change -- they look like Voltaire
combatting Kings and Popes.  They're still eighty percent witty
comments.  They have a foul, hot wind at their backs, but they don't
yet have the battalions.  

Communism, capitalism, socialism, whatever: we've never yet had any
economic system that recognizes that we have to live on a living
planet. Plankton and jungles make the air we breathe, but they have no
place at our counting-house.  National regulations do nothing much for
that situation.  New global regulations seem about as plausible as a
new global religion.

None of this a counsel of despair.  Seriously.  We dare not despair
because in any real crisis, the pessimists die fast.   This is a frank
recognition of the stakes. It's aimed at the adults in the room.  

Let me put it this way. People don't have to solve every problem in
the world in order to be happy.  People will always have problems. 
People ARE problems.  People become happy when they have something
coherent to be enthusiastic about.  People need to LOOK AND FEEL
they're solving some of mankind's many problems.  People can't stumble
around in public like blacked-out alcoholics, then have some jerk like
Phil Gramm tell them to buck up.

When you can't imagine how things are going to change, that doesn't
mean that nothing will change.  It means that things will change in
ways that are unimaginable.  
  
## 15 of 177: KUMBAYISTA! (smendler) Fri 2 Jan 09 11:33

    


>>Communism, capitalism, socialism, whatever: we've never yet had any
economic system that recognizes that we have to live on a living
planet.<<

Designing such a system should be pretty high on the to-do list, then.
 Are there any economists - or anyone else, for that matter - working
on that task?  

I am so much looking forward to getting past the old
socialism/capitalism arguments, and having some new terms to work with
that don't just provoke kneejerk reflexive reactions but actually
require some thought and contemplation.
  
## 16 of 177: KUMBAYISTA! (smendler) Fri 2 Jan 09 11:36

    
This is a marvelous quote, btw:

>>When you can't imagine how things are going to change, that doesn't
mean that nothing will change.  It means that things will change in
ways that are unimaginable.  <<
  
## 17 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Fri 2 Jan 09 11:37

    
<left-wing green yeoman peasantry>

<counsel of despair>

<frank recognition of the stakes>

<change in ways that are unimaginable>


"left-wing, yeoman and peasantry" are your words, Bruce. "Green"––
however ostentatiously the big corporations have appropriated the
concept––is a vital concept for the future of humanity.

How can we have a frank recognition of the unimaginable?  If we can
imagine better groundrules for the Power Moguls, perhaps there will be
hope for our great grandchildren. Derisive assessments from wired
foxholes won't get us there.  

Yes, to what <smedler> suggests in #15
  
## 18 of 177: (jacob) Fri 2 Jan 09 12:01

    
One thing that's come to mind lately is your bit about the RFID'd hammer
that you could lend to a neighbour and yet always know where it was.
Netflix and City Car Share implement certain aspects of that already, and I
can see that trend continuing.

But one aspect of that model of being able to rely on access to shared
resources is that consumption will be reduced.  Most of that reduction will
be in consumption that was wasted, so in the long term this will be good
for efficiency, but in the short-medium term it seems likely to be another
destabilizing force for the economy.  Everywhere that we can trim a little
off with a little application of IT, we will.  Corporations are doing this
internally in a huge way that's not totally visible - they can see the
savings from uniform implementation in a way that individual households
can't - but the consumer versions will follow.  This can't help but depress
demand.  Any thoughts on that, a few years on from the hammer example?

My other frequent thought is that the US and Europe are already
post-scarcity economies, in large part.  The costs of everything have
crashed, and the asset bubbles we've had are partially about the problem in
establishing stable returns in an economy where prices are naturally always
dropping from technological advances.  The US, much of Western Europe,
Japan, maybe Korea, are already more than capable of producing a house,
car, furniture, appliances, clothing, and food for all of their inhabitants
using capital (though perhaps not resources) that already exists within
their countries.  For all kinds of reasons most of those places don't
actually do that, but they could.  The current organization of society
requires a large section to live in poverty, pour encourager les autres,
but the majority of the population live in a state where the basics of life
are assumed to be birthrights.

Meanwhile, about a 1/3 of the world lives in an extreme scarcity economy,
and another 1/3 lives in the garbage produced by the rich 1/3's
post-scarcity economy - China, India, Russia, primarily.  That is, they've
absorbed the cheap labour, pollution, and destructive resource extraction
parts of the rich world economy in the hope of joining it one day.
Probably not wrong about that prospect, either.

But the US hasn't (until recently) seemed to be looking hard at ways to
keep the machine running when non-scarcity and technological advance are
undercutting profit margins and employment.  In fact, planning in the US
seems to have devolved, via the MBA culture, to looking no further than the
next quarter, with evident consequences in the economy.  This has reduced
the financial industry to noise trading rather than investment, and the
disruptions of that approach are evident too.  Do you think might mark a
turning point in planning versus laissez-faire, or will it be back to
business as usual by 2010?
  
## 19 of 177: Hugh Watkins (hughw1936uk) Fri 2 Jan 09 13:48

    
change, and death, are the only certainties in our tiny lives
(cosmically seen)

A seven year basic economic cycle has long been a popular, if
unprovable, theory

Concurently with 9 and 13 year cycles causing peaks and troughs by
coincidence
  
## 20 of 177: (dana) Fri 2 Jan 09 14:52

    
George Mokray writes:

I follow both Kunstler and Robb and have my beefs with both (Kunstler
doesn't want to organize and Robb believes he's discovering everything
himself, to be overly harsh about it).  What I'm finding here in the
city streets of Cambridge, MA is that we have been following a Gandhian
economic path.  The newest example is the monthly weatherization
barn-raisings we do.  A small group, which could be characterized as a
seva ashram, organizes a barnraising on a local house and 30 to 40
people come over and insulate everything they can reach in a half day
and install energy efficiency devices all over the place.  One house
gets tighter resulting in immediate savings of energy and money and
more comfort and a whole group of people learn how to do the same
things for themselves.  This could be considered local production,
swadeshi but, instead of spinning thread for khadi cloth on a spinning
wheel (recently the traditional charha spinning wheel has been adapted
to generate electricity from the same hand motion that spins the
thread), we are weatherstripping windows and doors and caulking cracks
in the foundation.  

The thirty year campaign for farmers' markets and local (organic)
foods may also be considered as an exercise in Gandhian economics as
well.  Gandhian economics is small group economics, collaborative
economics where the object is not greater per capita consumption or GDP
but full and productive employment.  It is a labor-intensive
satisficing 

What I keep on discovering is that the best responses to our present
predicaments have been available for decades.  The only thing is we
don't usually do them until the manure hits the ventilation system and
some trendy new guru comes around to proclaim the next revelation.

But then I'm still waiting for somebody to update Edward Sylvester
Morse's 1881 solar HVAC patent and that the New Alchemy Institute
proved the efficacy and economics of small-scale agriculture around
1975.
  
## 21 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 09 15:40

    
New Alchemy Institute was visionary, an excellent model that we should
revive - probably on every city block.

"Among our major tasks is the creation of ecologically derived human
support systems - renewable energy, agriculture aquaculture, housing
and landscapes. The strategies we research emphasize a minimal reliance
on fossil fuels and operate on a scale accessible to individuals,
families and small groups. It is our belief that ecological and social
transformations must take place at the lowest functional levels of
society if humankind is to direct its course towards a greener, saner
world."

"Our programs are geared to produce not riches, but rich and stable
lives, independent of world fashion and the vagaries of international
economics. The New Alchemists work at the lowest functional level of
society on the premise that society, like the planet itself, can be no
healthier than the components of which it is constructed. The urgency
of our efforts is based on our belief that the industrial societies
which now dominate the world are in the process of destroying it." 

http://www.nature.my.cape.com/greencenter/newalchemy.html
  
## 22 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 09 16:03

    
I like that George gives us something to think about that's concrete,
local, and scalable. Isn't that how we have to approach solutions?
Global scale abstraction doesn't speak to us as well.

Bruce, what kinds of solutions are you seeing from designers,
inventors, and other innovators that you're hanging out with? 
  
## 23 of 177: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 2 Jan 09 16:08

    
re: "Last year was the first year when I've felt genuinely sorry for
responsible, well-to-do people.  Suddenly they've got the
precariousness of creatives, of the underclass, without that gleeful
experience of decades spent living-it-up."

What it seems to come down to is that we're all dreamers, and if you
try to suppress that then you end up being susceptible to some
particularly boring dreams, like making a killing on the real estate or
earning a steady 10% per year on the stock market.  And then 40% of
the dreams go up in smoke, but I figure it's like a forest fire.  The
results may look bleak, but for the survivors, life goes on.  It goes
on whether you learned anything or not, though I hope we do.

One thing we learned from last year's rise and fall of gas prices is
that people really do respond to incentives, but a system that's
over-adapted to an artificial stability can't keep up.
  
## 24 of 177: (jacob) Fri 2 Jan 09 18:59

    
I think I am going to file "over-adapted to an artificial stability" away
for later.  That's an excellent description.
  
## 25 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Fri 2 Jan 09 19:24

    
<Global scale abstraction doesn't speak to us as well>

Grass roots, bottom up communal-style barn-raisings or Gandhian
economics all sound like good, plausible hippie-speak solutions to me. 
Yet grassroots approaches in no way negate global concerns and global
approaches to positive change.  Certainly with the internet and
commerce becoming worldwide, global scale considerations become less
and less abstract every day. It is the mindset of the large-scale
business and political players that especially need to be persuaded or
coerced into more earth-friendly behavior.  

This is the emerging new Zeitgeist of our time. It has to be if we are
to avoid awful collapses within our human civilizations.  Our brains
are getting better at comprehending planetary ecology as a system
possessing its own slow-moving intelligence, and the world as a living
system that is now reacting to the collective excesses of human
behavior.  Such awareness is the first step to imagining necessary
large-scale behavioral modification.  The "ecological footprint
analysis tool" from the University of British Columbia, is one such
large-scale, conceptual manifestation that is not an abstraction.
 
  
## 26 of 177: Art Kleiner (art) Sat 3 Jan 09 01:47

    
Thanks for introducing me to Orlov - I hadn't been aware of him
before. 

Much of the current talk about collapse reminds me of similar
conversations in the 1970s -- when CoEvolution Quarterly published a
photo of a woman on a beach saying, "Armageddon outa here!" -- and the
early 1990s -- when Slackers came out. The realities of middle-class
collapse are terrible. A good friend of mine just had a life savings
wipe-out in the Madoff debacle. Being a grasshopper myself, with
limited savings, I feel some relief at not being caught up in the
crisis as badly as others, but since I make my living as an editor and
writer, I know I would not be among the last to suffer in a serious
collapse. 

But is that really what we're facing? The trouble with analogies to
the Soviet Union, or Italy, or any other country, is that we don't
really have a clue as to what parts of the analogy are critically
similar and what are not. I agree, for example, that America is riven
by anomie and "bowling alone," trained through years of television and
relying on government for support. But as a parent of three
grade-school children in a relatively dense New York suburb, I also see
a huge amount of latent community spirit that might kick in, like
potential energy before the rock starts rolling downhill. I haven't
seen anything like Mokray's barnraising-weatherizing, but I think it
COULD happen.... Sort of like the Grameen bank, but in a middle-class
context. 

Similarly, to have huge shortages of goods there would have to be a
long devolution of manufacturing and shipping in this country; the cash
backlog and demand would be such that, for that to happen, there would
have to be severe privation for six months or more. It COULD happen,
but for it to happen, mere credit collapse would not be enough. 

The big fear is that the government bailout is yet another bubble. I
regard the past 10 years as an effort to continually get back to the
1990s bubble - first through housing, then commodities, then energy,
then derivatives, then housing again - maybe not in that order. The
goal for a lot of people was to refind that comfortable 10% growth....
what if the bailouts represent a last-ditch desperate attempt to
accomplish this, and then end up collapsing themselves? I'm not sure
what such a collapse would look like; perhaps we'd have to go back to
the 1700s to find one. 

I take comfort in ideas from two theorists: Peter Senge posits that
the entire industrial age was a bubble, that is now collapsing.... and
Carlota Perez says that the industrial age has been here at least four
times before. 
  
## 27 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 3 Jan 09 07:52

    
Art, those are great points: abstractions and analogies aren't as
helpful when you're into new territory without a map. And I dn't think
we're talking about "mere credit collapse" - that's just one piece of a
complex unraveling. I didn't read Perez, but I thought Senge was onto
something... we've been in the industrial age "bubble" so long we
couldn't see it, and we couldn't see around it.

Here's what I think I'm seeing, and I'm eager to hear what Bruce has
to say. There is the credit collapse, and the various unethical and
illegal practices that have brought chaos to the financial sector.
There's a realization that oil is not forever, so even if we're not at
peak, we're so much more keenly aware that it's a finite resource, and
whether it's cheap and goes fast or expensive and spent more slowly, it
will eventually be gone. And we know we have to rethink the way we use
oil as we rethink everything we do that dumps additional carbon into
the atmosphere - so we have constraints that we failed to acknowledge
through most of the industrial revolution.

There's also the transformation of human resources, as developing
nations evolve into societies with any kind of middle class, they
demand more resources and they take more work. If it's decreasingly the
case that a few industrialized nations rule and the rest of the world
serves, we have to consider how limited resources are shared more
broadly. We can fight for the resources and the jobs, or we can
cooperate, but either way, we're challenged and we have a difficult
ongoing transition.

And then there's global warming, massive pollution, dying oceans,
various toxic byproducts of civilization gathering in festering piles
across the planet...

Generally assessing all of this, I think we're beginning to understand
that we have to base the way we live and the way we do business on
sustainability, and that's a transformation that offers significant
opportunity, so there's that one piece of good news. But how do we
proceed?

One solution at a meta level is to get good at sorting things out
locally. Neighborhood charrettes, and as I said earlier, a New Alchemy
Insitute on every block, replacing the failing corner stores.

Another question for Bruce: how is design relevant to solutions for
sustainability? Can we design our way to a more workable world?
  
## 28 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 3 Jan 09 08:37

    
I believe Jacob's onto something with post #18 there.

"The costs of everything have crashed, and the asset bubbles we've had
are partially about the problem in establishing stable returns in an
economy where prices are naturally always
dropping from technological advances."

I can't entirely believe that prices naturally skid toward zero,
Chris-Anderson-style.  For instance, bison meat used to cost nothing
because you could just step outside the door and shoot one.  Technical
advances like the railroads caused the price of bison meat to go up. 

Still, those asset bubbles are freakin' bubbly these days.  Globalized
electronic money seems to wander around like it's homeless.  It used
to be jet-setter money that hopped national borders, but now that
epoch's gone and it looks like miserable vagrancy set in.  Money keeps
looking for some solid roof with a nice eight percent ROI, but wherever
the money settles, something catches fire and falls over.  Money had
to flee technology, then flee real estate... oil... huddled in US
Treasury Bonds?  A Treasury bubble?   Where ARE those stable returns?  

This is what I like about Taleb's BLACK SWAN financial nihilism. 
Financial "plans" are schemes of wealth destruction.  Weird crap
happens -- financial epileptic fits, basically.  Reason fails.  At
length there's some return to a semblance of normalcy, and the economic
witch-doctors assure us that the wrath of the gods is gone.  It's safe
to get greedy again.  That's behavioral economics -- everything we
claim we know about economics is astrology, it's pep-talk.   We go for
it in the same cheery way that Aztecs used to go for human sacrifice.  
A Human Sacrifice Bubble.

I think this may in fact be so, but it begs the question as to what we
ought to do to feed the children, pet the cat and just get on with
daily living.  Do we HAVE to have Black Swans hiss and bite the
daylights out of us at random intervals?  Real people really suffer in
these tailspins.  If economies are inherently unstable, shouldn't we be
bending every effort to protect ourselves from their unreasonable
depredations?  A civil right to food and shelter would sound like a
good start.  How come we have to immiserate ourselves every time we
hear the black wings beating?
  
## 29 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 3 Jan 09 08:43

    


Jon was asking what kind of nifty designer gizmos I'm into this
season...  I'm still interested in the networked commons.  A social
invention that enables social inventions.    

If markets don't work, and central allocation doesn't work either,
then a commons makes a lot more sense to a lot more people.  It gets
easier to fight off the vampire hordes of commercial IP creeps who want
to monetize everything, lock it down with legal barbed-wire, and make
sure the  fix stays in.   Because they're broke.  So why not try
something that's not nailed to collapsing cash-flows?

"Commons-based peer production."  That seems to be opening up new
spaces for contemporary thought and action.  It might enable new modes
of getting by in tough times.

I find myself impressed that young people, my students, the Internet
natives, they don't seem aware how different the digital commons is
from previous ways of organization.  Google, Wikipedia, Craigslist,
Facebook even, they simply think that's how the real world works.  It's
like a HERE COMES EVERYBODY where they're already here.

The commons offers ways out of the glum solipsist autarchy of hippie
homesteads and survivalist city-states.  If you're gonna "do it
yourself" with a wireless Linux netbook, you're not doing it Robinson
Crusoe style.  You've got the collective labor of a couple million guys
there under your arm.  This is not a "virtual community" WELL-style. 
It's more like a huge, anonymous public infrastructure of aqueducts. 
But if you're getting clean free water, why buy that bottled stuff they
marketeers flew in Fiji?

 This peer-production stuff used to look very hobbyist and geekish and
rickety.  It was hotglue and strapping-tape.  It's still not
"mainstreaming," it will likely never have commercial gloss.  Still,
it's acquiring some kind of commons-gloss.  It looks better, it works
better, it performs with more functionality in wider areas of life.  
It has escaped its geek ghetto.  Normal people no longer apologize to
their bosses for using open-source components, or for finding things
out on the "unreliable" Internet.   

Hardware commons and instructables interest me quite a lot.   

The trend toward make-and-do labs and hacker spaces is also of keen
interest to me -- not just what gizmos people are designing and making,
but how the infrastructure of designing and making is itself breaking
up and reassembling in new component-sets.  "User Experience Design." 
Good God, what *isn't* "user experience design"?  It sounds like the
most vaporous thing on earth, but the way those guys talk is completely
imperial.

 I'm wondering what happens if somebody makes a small town
commons-based.  The street lights, the parking meters, they've all got
APIs... you get to hack the sewers, repaint the streets... all the
building regulations go up for grabs... Would it be a grimy hippie dive
like Christiania, or might it get suave and geeky-upscale, like the
Google campus?  

Suppose you found some dead James Howard Kunstler strip-mall burg,
bought it for a dollar, and turned it into "OpenSource-opolis" where
every possible object and service was creatively commonized.  Would
that be heaven, hell -- or what we've got now only different?
  
## 30 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 3 Jan 09 10:12

    
The pattern lanugage for communication that Doug Schuler's been
working on, articulated in his new book _Liberating Voices: A Pattern
Language for Communication Revolution_ (http://budurl.com/aebb) has a
Commons pattern: http://budurl.com/428v

Here's the context for the pattern:

"'The commons' is a useful term for contemporary political discourse
because it provides a new lexicon for re-situating market activity in a
social and political context. It helps us identify resources that
should not be alienated for market use, but should remain
non-propertized and 'owned' (in a civic or democratic sense) by
everyone. Our culture has no serious vocabulary for contextualizing
'the free market' in a social framework; it assumes that it is a
universal, ahistorical force of nature. The commons helps rectify this
conceptual problem by offering a rich, countervailing template to the
market paradigm, one that can speak about the economic and legal
aspects of a commons as intelligibly as its social and personal
aspects."

Incidentally, I just responded in an interview (to be published this
week at sxsw.com) with something similar to your idea above. I said...

"Remember how we used to say 'IP on everything,' talking about an
Internet of things? The mantra for the project I'm describing would be
'API for everything.'  Imagine a world where, in any given built
environment, you could interface with the building and all its systems
to get a clear picture of energy use, emissions, anything that has an
impact on the sustainability, not just of the building, but of the
building, its occupants, and the various ongoing interactions and
processes within."

API on everything doesn't depend on the OpenSourceopolis model, but
they would work well together. I tend to think the 100% commons-based
solution would evolve into something more like capitalism - that seems
to be an inherent of the human psyche and the way we work with the
concept of value and our inherent self-ishness. How could you create a
commons-based environment where "enightened self-interest" was a
factor?
  
## 31 of 177: (dana) Sat 3 Jan 09 10:53

    
Stefan Jones writes:

Obama's stimulus spending might work if it were heavily skewed toward
infrastructure retooling. Goal would not just be job creation for
survivability and sustainability. Like hardened power grids for shipping
windmill juice to power a national rail system. Or gear to turn sewage
into fertilizer for non-food-crop biofuels.

Hire Kuntsler and his ilk to rave up scenarios, then sadden them by
addressing them one by one. Implant an electrode in McCain's testicles to
make him even more ornery and put him in charge of vetting the
distribution.
  
## 32 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 3 Jan 09 11:13

    
<I regard the past 10 years as an effort to continually get back to
the 1990s bubble - first through housing, then commodities, then
energy, then derivatives, then housing again>

I'm no absentee Pocatello slum lord, but I think Art is correct about
holding the atypical returns of the 1990s as the standard.  George W.
Bush wasn't ushering in the Information Age, he was artificially
stimulating the economy on two primary fronts: first, through six years
of the loosest credit standards ever witnessed since the mortgage
phenomenon began, and secondly, with a war.  Iraq bolstered the good
old Military Industrial complex.  I think Dubya was hoping to delay the
collapse of his economic house of cards until after 1/20/09.   

<ways out of the glum solipsist autarchy of hippie
homesteads and survivalist city-states.>

WELL, I find it ironic to read Bruce's hippiephobic reactions here on
the Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link. I remember this from last year, too. 
You do remember the Last Whole Earth Catalog don't you Bruce? 
Indubitably hippie!  
 
<Would it be a grimy hippie dive like Christiania, or might it get
suave and geeky-upscale, like the Google campus?>

Yep, the hippies were guilty of the same thing that academics were in
the mid-70s until very recently.  A spirit of postmodernity supplanted
the hippies' consciousness revolution that championed last-whole-
earth-"we-can-change-the-world" possibilities, challenged
wasteful-materialistic-consumerism, honored our oneness as humans.  In
other words, except perhaps for the ecologists, many new disciplines
surfaced from the 60s to embrace our separateness, our differences, and
most significantly, our personal/corporate/national returns on
investment.  Women's Studies, Native American Studies, Black (African
American) Studies, Chicano Studies, GLBT Studies, Entrepreneurial
Studies––each gender, every ethnicity and persuasion, and ROI needed
its own voice and positionality to crush the Euro-male grand narrative
that was oppressing us.  Thank the French poststructuralists for the
theoretical deconstruction.  There was, of course, no Department of
Countercultural Studies anywhere, and the thought that humans could
author change on a grand scale went by the wayside, too. The returns on
our money dominated.  

Of course, many of the bona fide hippies split from the cities to go
back to the land to self-imposed, self-reliant virtual irrelevance. 
There were even anomalies such as Copenhagen's Christiania, where the
Danish hippies took over a large abandoned Military base and turned it
into a community that would have made Gandhian economists proud, except
for constant external pressures from the straight world Dansk polis,
or invasions from hard drug dealers or runaways looking for easy fixes
that always pressured that scene.     

But in this you miss the point of "Ethos", Bruce. Again, you are
talking in a forum that is an outgrowth of the hippie consciousness. 
Even in academia today, we are seeing these same scholars who forged
separate places for themselves in new departments, now beginning to
champion interdisciplinarity as never before. Public humanities are
finding ways to connect the academic foxholes.  Theory is giving way to
praxis.  And, yes, global conscientiousness is rising.  

Last year I attended a conference of hard scientists called "The
Greening of the Disciplines."  It sure seemed like there was a whole
lotta hippie heritage there, even lots of scientists with ponytails.

<Opensource-opolis> is a very good start for the new ethos, though. 
There is no tone of foxhole derision.  Hey, it may not even be
neo-hippie, but it is sterling!  
  
## 33 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 3 Jan 09 11:19

    
'How could you create a commons-based environment where "enlightened
self interest" was a factor?'

Maybe by making that environment a more pleasing place to live
than the old-style Dickensian racket.  

Or maybe by abandoning the older and demeaning idea of being
"consumers."  I think the new word that John Robb is looking for here
is probably the old word "citizen."  Participation in public affairs
used to be construed as "civic duty."  Joining the military was being
"in service."  It wasn't considered a personal profit-center.

http://globalguerrillas.typepad.com/globalguerrillas/2009/01/middle-class-co.html

Makes you wonder what the world might look like if peers building
commons resources were visibly marked out, honored, publicly
distinguished.  Sure, you get medals, maybe a flag.  People stand
respectfully when you enter a bus.  You wear a clerical collar. 
Whuffie pours out of you like manna; you have a golden glow.  Traffic
lights favor your vehicle.  You get free pizzas.

It might take less than one would think.  

People really really like to shop, but "consuming" has a 1950s sound
now.   I don't know that many gluttons who really and seriously like to
"consume" things they buy, to literally gorge on products.  People
like comfort, status and self-worth, they like services and luxury. 
There aren't too many of us who seriously need to stockpile fifty dozen
donuts.  

I've been a computer "consumer" for decades now, in the sense that I
follow the trade press and buy computers regularly, but I dunno: if a
$300 netbook running freeware lets me get the job done, 2009 may be the
year when I just plain vanish off the radar.  I'd still be plenty busy
at my keyboard, but as a financial entity supporting the "computer
industry," I would just dissipate into the clouds.
  
## 34 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 3 Jan 09 11:26

    
<I tend to think the 100% commons-based
solution would evolve into something more like capitalism>

Jon, see post #15.  You were doing so well with the use of the term
"commons" to forge a new political/cultural mindset, before reverting
to the old-school paradigm of "capitalism" that kills the commons
before it can get started.  Of course, there need to be human
incentives, such as ROI, but you just got done showing, very
eloquently, why the incentives have to go beyond simply money
considerations. 
  
## 35 of 177: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 3 Jan 09 13:21

    
One thing to remember about today's do-it-yourself culture is that
it's an optional supplement to industrial production.  Sure, making
clothes is fun sometimes for some people, but not if you have no
alternative.  Who wants to make their own underwear, as a regular
thing?

It's the same for food; people grow tomatoes but there's no big trend
towards growing your own flour or rice, and there's no stigma at all
over eating out if you're not into cooking.

What seems to be happening is that making high-margin fashionable
stuff (including media and software) becomes increasingly
do-it-yourself but the boring stuff like basic supplies and
infrastructure get manufactured cheaply by international companies at
scale.
  
## 36 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 3 Jan 09 13:38

    
We can't wish the psychic foundations for "capitalism" away with an
"old-school paradigm" dismissal. And I think what kills the commons is
greed, not capitalism.

I do see people letting go of consumerism - it's like they're
exhausted with it. And the consumers wandering stores this Christmas
often looked puzzled - what else can I buy? Everybody's loaded, toys
are everywhere.

I think about the millions of cars sitting in new and used car lots -
how many more cars can we need, or want? It's no wonder the automobile
industry is gasping for breath. We have more and more supply, less and
less demand. It's not sustainable.

What do you do with a marketplace where everybody's got something to
sell, and nobody's buying?

(bslesins slipped in with a relevant thought while I was writing this
post.)
  
## 37 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sat 3 Jan 09 14:11

    
Certainly, there are psychic foundations for "capitalism" which are as
basic as looking out for our own interests.  The problem I see with
the term is, for example, when American Republicans wrap themselves in
this term and villainize the term socialism.

American "capitalism" is infused with many socialistic attributes that
are taken as givens.  We do not have the capitalism of Dickens' London
where child labor, or polluting the shared skies or discharging
effluent into the rivers or drinking water is tolerated. Pollution
control is a form of socialism.  In the US we have Social Security and
Medicare, clearly socialist measures.  Likewise, $700 billion dollar
bailouts for the Plutocrats is blatantly socialistic, but justified to
bolster capitalism in America.

Consequently, if we create a workable "commons" approach, it may have
attributes of both socialism and capitalism for it to work, but the use
of these terms, which are already so convoluted and politically
distorted, have little value for us as we try to move forward.  

I think what post #15 was suggesting, is that we need to rethink how
we "frame" our political paradigms. The same is true for the terms
"liberal" and "conservative".  These terms have come to have little
meaning except within the narrowest of policy directives, such as what
we should do about health care, gay marriage, etc.  

The idea of a "commons" does have historical precedence, but the
application of the term today is not stymied by the kind of perceptual
baggage that come with these other terms.  Also, you are not wrong to
be concerned with the underlying factors that killed the "commons" of
old.
  
## 38 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Sun 4 Jan 09 08:55

    
How much of what's wrong and getting worse with the world traces to the
sacred cow status of capitalism?
  
## 39 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 4 Jan 09 10:14

    
I don't think that capitalism or communism or socialism cause or cure
"what's wrong and getting worse." They've all worked in some contexts
and failed in others. Maybe the questions are, not how do we dispense
with capitalism, but how do we have a capitalism that is less
corruptible, and how do we create a social context where fair profit is
okay, but greed is unacceptable?
  
## 40 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 4 Jan 09 10:48

    <scribbled>
  
## 41 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 4 Jan 09 11:26

    
...again, we start by forging new geo- and socio-political paradigms
with labels that don't set off firestorms of opposition before
reasonable innovations have a chance to take root.

For example, why do we allow the sacred cow of capitalism to prevail
when big money is to be had, but when faced with the downside of
corporate ineptness and market collapse, we bail out the incompetence
with corporate socialism.  

It's not so simple as fair profit VS greed.  When Congress voted in
2000 to allow private insurance firms (A.E.G.) to insure bundled
mortgages, suddenly the banks who you approach for a loan, knew they
could transfer their risk. It wasn't their money at stake. Suddenly,
they didn't look at you as a homebuyer in terms of the risk and reward
of their investment in you, but in terms of making money solely on the
immediate transaction.  The risk of your nonpayment was not theirs.  Of
course, with Fannie Mae, IndiMac, FreddieMac underwriting transactions
with high credit risk (politically motivated to stimulate the economy)
we had the other key factor which created our current mess.  

It's a myth that pure capitalism was at fault here, for the artificial
stimulation of our housing sector was rife with Government
malfeasance, too.  Of course, AEG was instantly bailed out.  Our
Congress created this precise problem in 2000.  When all the
foreclosures hit, AEG, who was delighted to take the insurance
premiums, didn't have the money to pay out.  

So, yes, we need a social context where people can afford the housing
they buy (and we need more affordable housing, too!), but, again, terms
like capitalism and socialism become convenient smokescreens for the
politicians and corporations to maneuver in ways that, as we see, can
be highly irresponsible, except in the short term. 
  
## 42 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 4 Jan 09 11:29

    
"One thing to remember about today's do-it-yourself culture is that
it's an optional supplement to industrial production.  Sure, making
clothes is fun sometimes for some people, but not if you have no
alternative.  Who wants to make their own underwear, as a regular
thing?
"It's the same for food; people grow tomatoes but there's no big trend
towards growing your own flour or rice, and there's no stigma at all
over eating out if you're not into cooking.

"What seems to be happening is that making high-margin fashionable
stuff (including media and software) becomes increasingly
do-it-yourself but the boring stuff like basic supplies and
infrastructure get manufactured cheaply by international companies at
scale."


*These are important issues.
 
*The thing that interests me about today's "do-it-yourself" culture
is that it's so commons-based.  You wouldn't see Thoreau retreating
to Walden Pond to make himself some high-margin fashionable media
and software.  That wouldn't be possible. 

Besides, why would true "do-it-yourself"
even BOTHER to be "high margin"?  You're not selling it,
you're supposed to be making and using it autonomously.  

And "fashionable"?  Fashionable to whom? Why?  Thoreau isn't in an
enterprise that requires new clothes.  Nobody is looking.

*It's not the massive scale of DIY that I find promising.  I've
got a few Maker-style knick-knacks in my daily life, more
than I used to, but they're not replacing industrial production
for the planet's teeming masses. Not this year, that's for sure.

*What powerfully strikes me is that "international companies"
are no longer "making it themselves," either.  These companies
don't design it, they don't manufacture it, they don't
distribute it... They've retreated to their "core competencies,"
which I'd be guessing are phantoms like "shareholder value"
and other financial legerdemain.  Or buying into the Republican Party,
maybe.  Isn't that rather detached from on-the-ground reality
in 2009?

*Individuals Versus Big Corporations are just not the issue any more. 
It's more like no-profit networked peer-groups versus loose gangs of 
for-profit contractual hucksters.  Two ad-hocracies, both globalized
now: the peers are on the net, while the corporations are offshored.

*Offshored corporations have cash and can buy the nation-state,
but that activity weakens nation-states drastically.  Since
corporations use national currencies, they're kinda sawing off their
own feet.

*It's hard to figure which of those systems is the more
unstable and peculiar.  Given that finance is collapsing
while Linux isn't collapsing, maybe the ground is shifting somewhat.

*If you try to frame this situation as Little Me versus IBM, we
get nowhere.  That's an argument John Ruskin was losing 150 years ago
in the arts-and-crafts movement.  

*Peer-production versus offshoring is a much more useful situation
to think about now.  Like: exactly *why* is peer-production so bad at
doing boring, useful, vital stuff like farming?  

*Then, instead of debating communism and socialism like we've been
doing since 1848,  we can ask: What might a plausible peer-production
farm look like?

*I'm guessing a peer-produced farm would be rather like a New Alchemy
greenhouse.  Except: rather than forcing its inventors to
stay nailed to Cape Cod so that the all-organic sewers didn't
overflow, its management would be networked.  You'd webcam your module
of the farm, crops would send you SMSes.  You wouldn't be tied
to the soil, which is surely one of the major components of
agricultural tedium.

*Of course you'd start out farming high-end hokum like baby
arugula and mutant purple okra, because that would attract
the star system-builders.  Once they built the infrastructure
and released it into the commons domain, THEN you get somebody
less inventive to grow some rice.

*At this point we're supposed to jump indignantly sideways and say,
well, the capitalist profit motive is central to the human condition,
so of course Three Initial Corporation sells the digital
urban rice!  

*Look: does that MATTER a whole lot now?  The reality on
the ground would be this: that digital urban rice has appeared.
Digital urban rice would be very weird.  We never had
any of that before.  It would change a lot of everyday reality.

*Everyday reality IS changing.  General Motors crumbles at
a touch.  There are no newspapers.  Gangs of terrorists
fight major military powers and bankrupt them.  A black guy
is the US President.  Ten months ago, petrocrats like Putin
and Chavez were conquering the world and now they've got
soupbowls.  

*We need new ways to frame what's going on.
  
## 43 of 177: Sebastian Mendler (smendler) Sun 4 Jan 09 12:30

    
Re capitalism: I have been wondering if it is possible, symbolically
speaking, to take Friedman's dictum about the social responsibility of
corporations - namely, "the only social responsibility of a corporation
is to deliver maximum profits to its shareholders" - and append three
simple words: "WITHOUT DOING HARM..."

That is, without doing damage to the environment, or causing
involuntary suffering among other humans.  Is such a capitalism
possible?  Is it still capitalism?
  
## 44 of 177: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 4 Jan 09 14:39

    
The relative amounts can be different, but whether you're Apple or
Wikipedia or the Obama campaign, you still need to get people to pay
attention, give money, and perform services.

Raising money - well, that's the core competence of a capitalist
organization, right?  Outsource everything else, but if you're raising
money and spending it then you're controlling what other people do in a
fundamentally capitalist way.  A public radio station begging on the
air and selling "sponsorships" is essentially engaging in capitalism. 
So is a church that asks for donations.  So is anyone who works for a
living and gets what they need by spending their own money.

However you do it, you're in trouble when people decide to stop paying
attention to you and the money stops flowing in. 

Ad-hoc organization is a different game where central control over
spending goes away; instead of raising money you get people to either
work or spend their own money on a project's behalf.  Organization
becomes less about controlling cash flow and more about documenting the
state of the project and encouraging common goals.

Some projects can even have a separate existence from the people who
work on them.  Even if nobody's interested, a dead software project
could hibernate until someone else stumbles across it and becomes
interested again.  A sufficiently compelling project like solving
Fermat's last theorem could get people to work on it on and off for
centuries.  

But the thing is, people can't *rely* on a project like that.  It's
fine for mathematics or creating art where there's no deadline.  But
basic needs like providing food and shelter have deadlines.  Command
and control arises out of urgent short-term goals.  The Chinese peasant
traveling far from home to work in a factory has needs they want taken
care of, and your outsourcing capitalist firm has something to offer. 
(Although, nobody sensible is going to expect a pension from one of
them.)
  
## 45 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 4 Jan 09 15:52

    
>>>
It's not so simple as fair profit VS greed.
<<<

Nothing's ever simple, especially where economics is concerned. But
fair profit vs greed is relevant to the question of capitalism. To the
question of economic tsunami, I think you have to register several
quakes to get the complete analysis. But the guy who's swimming for his
life isn't thinking about the Richter scale. He'll do with a floatable
bit of debris.

>>>
*We need new ways to frame what's going on.
<<<

Amen! And you know how it goes - at least in transition, the older
modes don't disappear. I'm seeing more and more work getting done by
aggregates of contractors working cooperatively, and a whole crew of
entrepreneurs who are building clusters instead of companies.  More
coworking environments are springing up, and the coworkers are forming
alliances to do all sorts of things, both innovative and mundane. More
and more businesses are bootstrapped.

But larger shops aren't closing their doors, at least not yet. The
business schools are still spewing MBAs with recipes for building
companies through round to round financing, venture capitalists are
still scouting prospects, and established companies are still churning
along, building widgets. Big companies may be dinosaurs, but they're
still stomping through the forest, gobbling mammals.

>>>
"the only social responsibility of a corporation
is to deliver maximum profits to its shareholders" - and append three
simple words: "WITHOUT DOING HARM..."
<<<

There's no law of capitalism that says you have to maximize profit,
and socially responsible companies are already forming that set
different priorities ahead of profit maximization. For example, a
company might say to its shareholders, our goal is the best possible
profit we can get, but without sweatshops, without pollution. So I
think what you're saying already exists, and you're seeing more
companies exploring the meaning of "corporate social responsibility."

The question then is what a company's to do if it realizes it can't
profit *at all* without running offshore sweatshops, working minors
twelve hours a day, or without dumping pollution into the environment.
What then?

And what if you found that the only way to guarantee a decent standard
of living to every living human being was to scale your own lifestyle
'way down?  Who's going to make  concessions? A multizillionaire isn't
going to voluntarily give up his mutliple transcontinental homes, and a
suburban family of five or six won't voluntarily give up a couple of
bedrooms - they'll struggle to hold onto what they've got. And while
CSR is a bit of a trend, many corporations won't go there voluntarily,
or their shareholders won't let them.

But the reality is global demand for better living against limited
resources, and that resistance we'd all feel to giving up what we've
got could be volatile.

(I think I'm just agreeing with <bslesins>.)

I should remind people who are not on the WELL and are reading this -
you can chime in on all this by emailing inkwell@well.com. Our hosts
will post your comments and questions here.
  
## 46 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 4 Jan 09 17:46

    
<The question then is what a company's to do if it realizes it can't
profit *at all* without running offshore sweatshops, working minors
twelve hours a day, or without dumping pollution into the environment.
What then?>

If corporations are allowed to be treated with the same legal
standards as human beings, then certain behaviors simply must be
prohibited. Despite all the get-big-government-off-our-backs, this is a
highly legitimate role of social governance.  For example, the strip
mining rape of the 1960s in Kentucky is simply not allowed today in the
US, nor is blatant discrimination, child labor, etc.  No society is
obligated to allow unfettered capitalism just for the sake of
private-sector profit/job creation/economic development.  It is
incumbent on businesses to conduct themselves in a law abiding fashion.
 

As for the shift of such ugly "capitalism" to second and third world
pollution/low wage havens, it is mostly incumbent on the governments of
India, China, etc. to disallow the fouling of their own nests.  Beyond
the Nation-State, there need to be transnational initiatives to
pressure against the worst environmental and human transgressions such
as those related to nuclear proliferation or profligate carbon
emissions.

Ahh, now we begin to approach the ethos of a global consciousness
where the obsolete capitalist/socialist dialectic begins to be replaced
by newly framed socio- and geo-political paradigms. 
  
## 47 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Sun 4 Jan 09 18:56

    
> exactly *why* is peer-production so bad at
> doing boring, useful, vital stuff like farming?

It might turn out to be better at designing, building, and programming
machines to do the boring, vital stuff.
  
## 48 of 177: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 4 Jan 09 19:50

    
"There's no law of capitalism that says you have to maximize profit"

Actually, there is, but it's toothless because almost anything can be
justified as somehow being in the long-term interest of shareholders.

"For example, a company might say to its shareholders, our goal is the
best possible profit we can get, but without sweatshops, without
pollution."

... well no, you can't say that unless you add that being a good
citizen and maintaining a good reputation is also in the company's
long-term interests because it's good marketing, yadda yadda.  It's not
hard to justify because it might even be true.

Generally speaking, companies play to win and that's how it should be.
 The question is whether you try to play by the rules, or do you
undermine the ref's attempts to keep the game fair? And when you're
done playing the game for the day and put your citizen hat on, do you
vote for rules that will make the game more balanced and support the
refs?

We've just come through a period where lots of people pretty much knew
there was lots of cheating going on, but few people tried very hard to
do anything about it, and there were lots of people making up
self-serving theories about why nobody *should* do anything about it.

More here:
 
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/01/04/opinion/04lewiseinhorn.html
  
## 49 of 177: (wiggly) Sun 4 Jan 09 22:11

    
Bob Morris writes:

"Resilient communities" theorists are, without knowing it, entering the
place where anarchists have been for decades. No, I don't mean
bomb-throwing nihilists, but rather non-violent anarchists who've been
discussing how to implement non-coercive, community-based organizations
for quite some time now. They might have much to add to the discussion.
And vice versa.

So what comes next? What's after capitalism and socialsm? I think it will
be quite a lot like resilient communities / anarchism.

Inherent in any such discussion are the two eternal questions of a new
social structure. Who will pick up the garbage and how to protect against
those who choose to ignore the rules.
  
## 50 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 4 Jan 09 22:24

    
>>>
"There's no law of capitalism that says you have to maximize profit"

Actually, there is, but it's toothless because almost anything can be
justified as somehow being in the long-term interest of shareholders.
<<<

I suppose there is, if you assume that the word of Milton Friedman and
others who make that argument is law. But my understanding is that a
corporation can have a different agreement with its shareholders - its
charter can assert other priorities. Investors may choose not to
invest, but some will value socially responsible behavior and accept
reduced profits that may result. (I agree that they're unlikely to
accept *no* profits as a result.)
  
## 51 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 09 00:44

    
*Welp, I kinda figured we'd have to spend this year talking about
economics.  The Dismal Science.  Do you realize how boring this
discussion is gonna look in retrospect?  Even utterly brilliant
economics is notoriously boring.

*Still, maybe we've just gotta do it, in the same grim way that it was
a "duty" for a generation of North Vietnamese to die for their
country.  

*So: I'm not entirely buying bslesin's argument that ad-hoc
organizations are inherently undependable, while command-and-control
successfully meets the urgent requirements.  It's true that you can't
trust a bunch of scattered dilettante hobbyists with the
care-and-feeding of your children.  However:  command-and-control can
become unpredictable tyranny.  Stalin didn't feed the peasants, he
starved them.  Same for the Great Leap Forward in China.  

*Whereas markets, especially small-scale peasant markets, are more
adhocratic and also more dependable.  If you're depending on food for
the kids every morning, in real troubles you vote with your feet, and
go where the food is created and dependably distributed.  I'm thinking
that people might drift toward the commons through this kind of
visceral response.  Not because they've read Yochai Benkler and gotten
all ideologically convinced, but because it factually meets their needs
better.

*Networks can meet needs dependably.  The English language is an
ad-hocratic communications network.  Nobody seized central control
there to ram through some emergency adverbs.  

*The Internet is ad-hocratic. We're severely dependent on that system
now.  The French would love to "civilize" the Internet, but imagine
that the French government somehow seized full control of the Internet
and imposed a fully-organized, rational MINITEL Internet on the world. 
Would users gratefully depend on that solution, or would they panic
and flee?

*The natural biosphere, what's left of it, was organized without human
planning or intention, yet we depend on that utterly.  Nature
underlies all our pretenses that we're in control of events.  We have
no choice but to accept some Kevin-Kelly style neobiological
out-of-controlness; the questions are how and why, and where is that
good and where is it useless, or even just silly.

*I'm wondering when the new financial instability coaxes forth the
Russian response, which was and is the economic mafia.  An economic
mafia is a hybrid combination of ad-hocracy and tyranny.  It's a
black-market with armed autocrats struggling to direct events through
their social capital, a social cement of illicit favors, blood and
greed.  

*Economic mafias are unstable.  Not only are their markets unstable
because of the market opacity, but their politics are severely unstable
because of the succession problem and the lack of constitutional
checks and balances.  The structure of mafias is feudal loyalty,
cronyism... plus some terror.  So the mafia can internationalize pretty
well, it spreads laterally like oil on water, yet mafias don't scale
up very well.  They tax productive industries with the invisible
corruption tax, but you rarely see any mafia break ground, obtain
financing and build a productive industry.  Illegal industrial dumping
as a mafia industry, maybe.  The cocaine market?  That's huge, it's
global, it surely ships tons of product, but it's not industrial.  You
might argue that some failed-states are basically mafia.

*I can't doubt that in times that scream for a Robin Hood, we're gonna
see Mafia.  Most people in the world see them every day already. 
Maybe you could argue that the American Bailout funders are the
functional equivalent of Russian moguls.  Maybe we're seeing some
development there that is quite close to the opaque "privatizations" of
the Yeltsin era, when the tottering Soviet economy swiftly and
suddenly ended up in the pockets of seven guys.  The "semibankyrshina,"
as the Russians used to call them.  Yeltsin's Seven Bankers. Will we
see an Obama government where the private sector's in receivership and
run by a bunch of "Czars"?  The Car Czar, the Energy Czar, the
Broadband Czar...

*Putin has supposedly proved that a tight conspiracy of Russian spies
is tougher and smarter than a loose conspiracy of Russian moguls. 
Putin had the oil-boom at his back, though.  *Are* spies really tougher
than mafiosi?  Spies do have one great advantage over mafia: a
national flag.
  
## 52 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Mon 5 Jan 09 05:38

    
From Darryl Rosin:


"I'm not entirely buying bslesin's argument that ad-hoc
organizations are inherently undependable, while command-and-control
successfully meets the urgent requirements."

It's never one or the other. It's both and all the other things as well,
with people looking out for themselves and others.

My local Saturday market is at a suburban rugby league club. It's an ad-hoc
collection of volunteers who operate a C&C structure (the legal entity that
deals with external actors, allocates space and directs traffic) to provide
a forum for an ad-hoc collection of producers (none of whom are required to
be there) on a scale that allows me to rely on getting 80% of the food for a
family of four. I could do better If I were less picky and more organised.

"Nature underlies all our pretenses that we're in control of events."

All of human behaviour is given to us from Nature. Humans are naturally able
to think, manipulate, burn, design, destroy, nurture, observe, ignore and
all the rest. We are not in control of anything  but each of us individually
controls a great many things.

Love reading your thoughts at this time of the year, Bruce. Thanks.
  
## 53 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 09 07:07

    
I agree that economics is a boring subject... fish convening to argue
the sorry state of water. And all the issues of corporations, corporate
personhood, corporate social responsibility, shareholder value etc.
are just so much thudding drum & base to the great struggling majority
who have little invested, nothing saved; whose debt increases monthly
with unchecked, inexplicable credit card rate hikes; who are
decreasingly able to buy homes, send kids to college, even take
vacations, or weekends off.

Re adhocratic and local markets, USDA documented an increase in the
number of farmer's markets a couple of years ago, and there's a
movement around local food networks that include, not just farmer's
markets, but community gardens and food co-ops. This movement is
decentralized, dis-organized, and linked to a growing overall interest
in localized sustainable systems.

Re mafia-cracy - that opacity you refer to is most interesting; always
fascinating to imagine the machinations behind the curtain. Pull the
curtain away, perhaps nothing's there? Darryl says "We are not in
control of anything  but each of us individually controls a great many
things." I wonder.
  
## 54 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Mon 5 Jan 09 08:19

    
From Brock Armstrong.....

Bruce,

I was wondering what your current updated thoughts on the Vinge-Venter-
Extropian experiment community were? â€“ Do you have any 2009 addendum to
your Long Now talk. (That talk â€“ to little me - sounds how the sermon on
the mount must have played).  I realize the 'singularity' as a topic isn't
really about dealing with collapse - but it looks like it is full speed
ahead for these guys and gals. The notion of societal collapse seems to just
embolden the techno-triumphant mindset?  Can the graph still point up?  How
do you deal with freeloaders in an adhocracy?  What happens to children in a
post-singular world?  These are the most pernicious question to me.

(I read (and love) your blog greatly, appreciate your ironic-subversive
notation of all things beyond - have all the required reading: Robb, Cascio,
Kunstler, Benkler, Spuybroek, Sterlingâ€¦. Shakespeareâ€¦.)

In full respect,
Brock
  
## 55 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 09 09:57

    
We interrupt this litany of ceaseless woe to announce that
Rudy Rucker and I have just published another collaborative
science fiction story.

It's in the February 2009 issue of ASIMOV'S Science Fiction
and is aptly titled "Colliding Branes."  Its topic is the
literal end of the known universe.  As seen by a couple of
bloggers.

It's convulsively funny.  I mean, I wouldn't say that about
my own work, but Rucker wrote some of it.
  
## 56 of 177: uber-muso hipster hyperbole (pjm) Mon 5 Jan 09 09:58

    
Heh
  
## 57 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 09 10:03

    
My Long Now talk on the "Singularity."  I seem to recall remarking at
the time that "end of history notions" don't age well, and that the
Singularity is an end of history notion.  One among many.

Well, we've now had several years of subsequent history. I still see
no visible signs of spectacular rates of scientific advance escaping
human comprehension. If you find one, send email.  I'll pass it on to
"io9.com," which, really, if there's any justice, ought to have first
crack at that news. 

So I saw no Singularity since that talk.  I did see several more years
of dewy-eyed science geeks getting the political tar beaten out of
them by fundie Lysenkoists.  

If that finally stops in the new Administration, I won't need any
Rapture of the Nerds in order to shout Hallelujah.
  
## 58 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 5 Jan 09 11:45

    
Will the rapture of the nerds be a second coming of Jobs and Gates
descending into the New Silicasalem?  Will their command-and-control of
well programmed robots take out our garbage while other chips monitor
our every move to assure that we all follow the rules?  Then every
year, the elite will drop down on their knees at the revival tents,
knowing full well that these annual tradeshows only offer the
well-crafted illusion of an ad-hocracy.  Hallelujah, indeed! 
  
## 59 of 177: (dana) Mon 5 Jan 09 14:15

    
S. Yannis writes:

Bruce, don't you have a novel coming out this year?
 
Also, any notable works of fiction (SF or otherwise; in any medium)
that you care to point out from 2008?
  
## 60 of 177: D (dana) Mon 5 Jan 09 16:58

    <scribbled by dana Mon 5 Jan 09 17:11>
  
## 61 of 177: (dana) Mon 5 Jan 09 17:02

    
Ted Gumpton writes:

Hi Bruce et al,
This is a broad and mind-warpingly inspiring discussion - the first
I've read of its kind. I'm a lurker by nature - you've enticed me out.
I hope myquestion doesn't misjudge the forum. As I type this I'm sat in
the middle of England in an ordinary market town of 100,000 - most are
white-haired and 97% are white. Most of the young people who go away
to university seem not to come back. I have returned, and for the time
being I'm stuck here. I'm okay with that, but this is a long way from
the places where the stuff I read online is written. boingboing
penetration is low. I don't expect there are many people around here
who lol at xkcd. Or have the slightest idea what an RSS reader is. eBay
is an exciting novelty. If I mention to someone an interesting blog
post that I've read, it's likelyI'll be asked what a blog is.

But that's okay. That isn't the problem. That isn't my question.

I just read, for example, your last Viridian note. It has been
assimilated. I might evangelise it to someone else, but it's likely to
fall on deaf ears. The same goes for Cory Doctorow's next post about an
infringement of online civil liberties. Or Jason Kottke's on a piece
of great design. If I'm asked for a book recommendation, Neal
Stephenson's 'Cryptonomicon' isn't likely to be appreciated.

What bothers me is not a sense of isolation or alienation from my
environment or the people I share it with. The thing that bothers me is
the sense of spectatorship. I live in this place, but I also live
online. I don't watch much TV but I'm concerned that the mode of
passive consumption that characterises a TV viewing also represents the
sum of my engagement with the online culture to which I aspire. I read
it, but I don't live it. I'm a mutant, but I'm not a Happy Mutant.

My question is essentially this: What would you say to me about this,
and to the other people in other places, or who occupy different online
niches but who share a similar sense of ... perhaps ... 'detachment'?
  
## 62 of 177: (dana) Mon 5 Jan 09 17:11

    
(post #60 scribbled for formatting errors)

George Mokray writes:

My raw notes from _Foundation of Gandhian Economics_ are online at

http://www.globalswadeshi.net/forum/topics/notes-from-foundations-of

Just so you know what the term means.

Global Swadeshi is an online community with world-wide reach that is
trying to be a DIY center for local transformation towards living
within our ecological limits.  Might be that sustainability
peer-to-peer network thing some are proposing here.

Elinor Ostrum's work on the many different kinds of commons would be
good to consult.  Her 1990 book, Governing the Commons: The Evolution
of Institutions for Collective Action (New York: Cambridge University
Press), might be one place to start.  Haven't read much of her work but
I've seen her speak and she has devoted her working life to the idea
of the commons.  Even got Garrett Hardin to modify his "tragedy of the
commons" proposition from a blanket statement about common resources to
a statement about the "unregulated" commons.  Fact is, there are many
ways to regulate a commons so that the resources last for years,
decades, and, in some cases, centuries unto millennia.

I am promoting the idea of a weatherization barnraising on the White
House which would elevate that idea from a grassroots, hippie exercise
to a significant national priority. Doing things on a grassroots,
practical level does not negate the necessity for global solutions and
changing large-scale power structures wholesale. No reason why we can't
use one to drive the other.

The New Alchemy legacy is already in your supermarket and has been
there for years.  Who do you think first started American aquaculture
of tilapia?  What do you think the roots of aquaponics are?  These
days, John Todd is trying to get funding for his revisioning of
Appalachian coal
lands (rather topical I'd say).  He believes he can use his ecological
waste treatment designs to clean up coal sludge and slurry and replace
coal with ridgetop windmills and forestry biomass.  The full proposal,
which won the first Buckminster Fuller Challenge award, is at
http://challenge.bfi.org/sites/challenge.bfi.org/files/pdf_files/pdf%20files/jtodd_proposal.pdf

I agree with <bruces> that the word John Robb is looking for is
"citizen."  That describes who we need to become, citizens and
neighbors.  A sustainable future is going to look more like an Amish
farm than a Buck Rodgers jetpack.  The Mormon idea of having a year's
worth of food on
hand at any one time is not going to be unusual either.

The problem has never been technology but our desires and our
willingness to do those things we know are practical and possible.  It
took me a good twenty-five years before I got one room off the grid. 
It cost me less than $200 (now would cost me about $100) but now I have
multiple ways of doing so.  My methodology is available at
http://solarray.blogspot.com but I'm sure there are only a handful who
have done likewise.  I am a small person with a small mind and start
with small steps.  Too many people never do anything but talk (present
company excluded) and never progress from thought and talk to action
and from action to routine practice.  That's what we need, a routine
practice throughout our daily lives that builds in ecological
restoration rather than destruction.
  
## 63 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Mon 5 Jan 09 17:17

    <scribbled by emilyg Mon 5 Jan 09 20:29>
  
## 64 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Mon 5 Jan 09 17:29

    

 Hey Bruce -- Great to see you here again.

 You wrote a couple things early on that I'd like to follow up:

 "The same goes for Americans trying to rebel against Wall Street.
 There's no visible other space.  There's no liberated territory.  It's
 like rebelling against a funhouse mirror because it makes you look so
 fat and stupid."

 "Ecological economics" seems to offer a pretty practical bridge
 between Wall Street and the limits of the Earth's ecosystems.  What
 chances do you think these ideas have of catching on?

 I got all excited last fall when Sarkozy talked to the press about
 reinventing the global economic system, but that sorta talk fall by the
 wayside, fast.  None of the business reporters even knew how to write
 that story.

 It's sort of astounding how much is going to rely on Obama.  And with
 Larry Summers heading Obama's economic team -- and no Jeff Sachs or
 Herman Daly type of economist in sight when he lines them all up for
 press conferences -- I'm not optimistic.  But of course, as I'm one of
 those Voltaires tapping away daily at her global warming blog, I must
 be hopeful.

 And


 "Communism, capitalism, socialism, whatever: we've never yet had any
 economic system that recognizes that we have to live on a living
 planet. Plankton and jungles make the air we breathe, but they have no
 place at our counting-house.  National regulations do nothing much for
 that situation.  New global regulations seem about as plausible as a
 new global religion.

 "None of this a counsel of despair.  Seriously.  We dare not despair
 because in any real crisis, the pessimists die fast.   This is a frank
 recognition of the stakes. It's aimed at the adults in the room."

 As one of the Voltaires tapping away at her global warming blog and
 online news assignments, I'm trying to figure out how to move readers
 beyond the environmentalist equivalent of navel-gazing -- changing
 their goddamn light bulbs to CFLs, vowing to give up plastic bags --
 and pay some attention to the politics of global warming again (never
 mind getting involved) now that they're actually going to matter, for a
 change.

 Part of me believes that yes, personal actions matter, because they
 help build the groundswell of public opinion and support that
 politicians need to see if they're going to stick their necks out to
 confront Big Oil and Big Coal. But we were shopping for a better world
 in the 1980s, too.  And as economic and ecological conditions have
 become perceptibly worse nearly two decades later, people are still
 debating "paper or plastic"?

 From what I can tell as both a journalist and a media-consuming
 citizen of the United States, the big green groups are making next to
 no headway communicating the depth of the climate change crisis beyond
 their dedicated core members.

 Simultaneously, too many of my colleagues are still being suckered by
 the notion that there's any real debate about the reality of global
 warming.

 Help, Pope-Emperor!
  
## 65 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Mon 5 Jan 09 17:30

    
<Doing things on a grassroots, practical level does not negate the
necessity for global solutions and changing large-scale power
structures wholesale. No reason why we can't
use one to drive the other.>

Well, said, George. and when you say <from a grassroots, hippie
exercise to a significant national priority> it reminds me of John F.
Kennedy's Presidential Physical Fitness initiative in reverse. 

 
  
## 66 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 09 21:45

    
Emily, I suppose it's still a religious question for many, but I
haven't heard much debate lately - what are your colleagues thinking?

Bruce, have you had second thoughts about shutting down the Viridian
engine? Are you still hearing debate in your world?
  
## 67 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Tue 6 Jan 09 08:32

    

 Not sure what you mean, Jon: religous question?

My colleagues in enviro reporting are generally as frustrated as ever:
pressure to write sensationalistic stories, resistance to covering the slow
moving story of climate changes and climate science with the precision it
needs.

And then there are the truly disheartening developments, like CNN
disbanding its entire science and technology reporting team in favor of its
"Planet in Peril" series.  Just as we've returned to reality-based
scientific leadership in the federal gov't!

Beyond that sphere, I see examples of false balance every week in some or
other news outlet, and sometimes downright sloppy reporting (like
Politico.com's amazing reporting flop late last year).

And while there are a lot of readers at my globalwarming.change.org blog,
the most popular global warming "actions" on the site are so far things
like giving up plastic bags.
  
## 68 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 09 09:46

    
Emily, I meant that most of us are guided by belief, not actual
knowledge, about climate change. That's true of those who deny climate
change, but it's not just them. It happens that my beliefs about global
warming - that it's happening, and accelerating, and potentially
catastrophic, and that it's driven by, and can be mitigated by, human
action - are well-supported by climate scientists who've studied the
facts. But I don't have that knowledge myself, so it's my (admittedly
well-founded) belief against that of someone who disagrees. So there's
still debate, and it's a religious argument... one belief system vs
another.

I think it was hard for scientists early on who were pretty sure what
they were seeing, but were committed to scientific method, where you
qualify the difference between observable facts and hypotheses. A
climate scientist once told me how this was creating a perceptual
problem, that to laymen it seemed that they weren't certain about
climate change. Someone who's in denial anyway will take that as a
foundation for their denial. It's better today, I think - climate
scientists are pretty clear about what they think's happening.

But I understand what you're saying - some in media still assume the
question's still unresolved, and they think they're being objective.
  
## 69 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Tue 6 Jan 09 09:54

    


See, I fundamentally take issue with calling an understanding based on the
best scientific evidence a "belief," even if you yourself have not eyeballed
and measured and analysed that evidence firsthand.

I have never witnessed a polio vaccine killing a polio virus, but I have no
trouble saying that I know polio vaccines kill polio.

That's dicing it too fine jon, and essentially lets deniers define the terms
of the discussion -- which of course is what they've largely succeeded at
doing so far.
  
## 70 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 09 09:55

    
*Got some news on my speculative digital-urban rice front here.
It's a Japanese robot rice-planter here that navigates by GPS.

*I like everything about this gizmo except the old-fashioned word
"robot."
The device is likely better described as an autonomous urban
taxi with passengers that are rice plants.

http://www.impactlab.com/2009/01/05/robotic-rice-planter/
  
## 71 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 09 10:00

    
"Bruce, don't you have a novel coming out this year?"

*Yeah, my new novel THE CARYATIDS is out this February.
It's picking up some reviews now.  It took me four years to write that
book.  A pretty eventful four years.

*Fans of my novels naturally wonder where I've been all
this time, but I'm in pretty good shape compared to
the publishing industry.

*I hope I can write more novels without the glum prospect
of becoming a publisher myself.  I always, always feared
becoming a publisher.  "Those who worship the Muses end
up running a Museum."
  
## 72 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 09 10:01

    
"The thing that bothers me is
the sense of spectatorship. I live in this place, but I also live
online.... I'm a mutant, but I'm not a Happy Mutant.

"My question is essentially this: What would you say to me about this,
and to the other people in other places, or who occupy different
online
niches but who share a similar sense of ... perhaps ... 'detachment'?"

*Okay, brother, I hear you.  As a former denizen of a small Texas
refinery
town, I know where you are coming from.  I have a solution for you.
It's kind of a hard karma, but I can promise it will work.

*I would urge you to travel.  Put the computer down, get out of
the house, and get out of the town.  Go to weird cultural events, go
to conventions 
of mutants.  Travel cheap if you have to, but make a point to
spend a lot of time on the road.

*You wanna go accumulate a tonnage of stimulating stuff in two or
three
days.  Then take your loot back to the crib, and think hard about it. 
The joy of
living outside the hipster circuit is that, unlike them, you can get
some serious
perspective on all that noise.

*You will never be able to singlehandedly transform your small town of

retired people into an ashram for happy mutants.   I would not urge
you 
to try that. It's neither practical nor necessary.  But: if you 
keep your secret hacker personality entirely hidden on a screen, 
you will come to feel unhappily schizoid.  

*So: venture out in the open air.  Break your routines, and go mix it
up 
with the weird people.  In a spare, calculated, fully-planned fashion.
 

*When you start to feel like your boring little 
burrow there is actually your "safe and secure
base of operations," then you're on the right track. 
  
## 73 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 09 10:07

    
 "Ecological economics" seems to offer a pretty practical bridge
between Wall Street and the limits of the Earth's ecosystems.  What
chances do you think these ideas have of catching on?

*Maybe some chance, but at this point I'm kinda in the Taleb BLACK
SWAN camp; "ecology" is a real science, sorta -- but "economics" is
ninety percent voodoo.

*Frankly, I don't much want to see "the ideas catch on."  Instead, I
want some vigorous community to actually implement some "ecological
economics." I want people to go live there because their lives there
are more exciting than a cornball Buck Rogers jetpack, and a lot less
onerous than being Amish. Give me a city that's visibly living in
tomorrow, and you can print all the -eco-economics whitepapers you
want.

 "I got all excited last fall when Sarkozy talked to the press about
reinventing the global economic system, but that sorta talk fall by the
wayside, fast.  None of the business reporters even knew how to write
that story."

*Sarkozy has hundreds of ideas.  He even has maybe a dozen pretty
good, unorthodox, inventive, yet practical ideas.  Sarkozy's my
favorite European politician now, even though I'm certainly not "of the
Right."  I frankly doubt that Sarkozy himself is "of the Right" in any
ideological sense, either.  Sarkozy's a truly abnormal politician for
abnormal times.  In normal times he'd look pathological, but in crazy
times like these, he's like the only sane guy in our lifeboat.

*I just saw Sarkozy on BBC World News, popping up in Syria and trying
to shut down another impossible regional war.  The guy was visibly
enjoying himself at this hopeless task.  Nice spotlights focussed on
him,  a terrific soft-power French suit and tie ensemble, not one hair
out of place. Sarkozy's even more showbiz than Reagan or Berlusconi,
while being about a thousand times smarter than either of them.
He looked fantastic, even hallucinatory: way outside the European
political norm.  Like Obama, he's got this unexpected poly-ethnic
vigor.... and the people he put in his Cabinet are almost as weird as
he is. 

"It's sort of astounding how much is going to rely on Obama."

*The American Sarkozy.  If we're lucky.

*I know people are emotionally attached to the guy, but, objectively,
he's got almost every challenge that Clinton faced, plus he's got to
deal with all the havoc Bush caused.  I frankly have more intellectual
sympathy for him than heartfelt hope for him.
  
## 74 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 09 10:15

    

 From what I can tell as both a journalist and a media-consuming 
citizen of the United States, the big green groups are making next to
no headway communicating the depth of the climate change crisis beyond
their dedicated core members.

Help, Pope-Emperor!
  
*Okay, fine.  This is going to sound harsh, but you're right: the
depth of the climate crisis is very profound.  It will require a lot of
sacrifice from people who never expected to face that.

*Starting with you.   So: leave journalism. Stop preaching to the
green choir.  Be brave. Suffer.  Leave your big green groups.  Go into
big business  or big governance.

*Real solutions to a crisis of the size of climate change can only be
huge. Therefore, eventually, they will seem normal and dull. When
everything is "green," nothing is green.  Heroic campaigners will have
to accept the idea of becoming functionaries.

*That, or stop the campaigning.  Personally, I stopped the
campaigning. When functionaries are required, zealots should shut up
shop.
 
*You're a journalist.  So am I.  We can't hide from change in there. 
I'm frankly unsure what a "journalist" is supposed to in today's media
environment. Or tomorrow's.  I doubt anyone knows.

*You might want to consider working for green tech development. Some
organ like the cleantech equivalent of "Oil and Gas Journal." Something
specialized and dull that covers the Planet Earth, not with earnest
lectures and moral harangues, but with windmills and power relay
stations.

*Somebody's got to do that work.  It has to happen on the ground.
Physically.  On a huge scale.  Not with websites and manifestos.   With
machinery.

*Engineers are boring, dull and methodical, right?  Political activism
 is supposed to be more exciting.  Very well then.

*If I wanted to be politically effective, rather than visionary, I'd
disguise myself as a right-wing Green, probably some kind of
hunting-shooting NASCAR "conservationist," and I'd infiltrate the
Republicans this year.

"Look," I'd tell them, "Cheney said that the 'American way of life is
not negotiable.' Look where that blind attitude got us -- kicked into
the political wilderness, with neither our global preeminence nor our
American way of life. We're on the ropes...

*"So let's wise up -- here's the plan.  We've still got a few of the
Red States -- let's cover them with biomass and windmills. We pocket
that Arab oil money ourselves.  We play the patriot card, while the
Left tries to suck up to their nonexistent world governments. We're
'defending the homeland' while they argue their abstract ozone levels.

*"Pacifism, feminism, socialism, racial integration, all that leftie
stuff we hate forever -- we still fight that.  Tooth and nail.  But we
steal the Left's clothes on the all-important energy issue -- because
they're congenitally unable to build or sell a damn thing."

*"Furthermore, that endless Kyoto mess?  That's always useless crap. 
No nation likes Kyoto, so it's never going to work. 

So we publicly recognize the climate crisis: just as if we suddenly
discovered it ourselves.   And we don't downplay the climate crisis: we
OVERPLAY  the crisis.

"Then we blame the crisis on foreigners.  We're not liberal weak
sisters 'negotiating Kyoto agreements.'  We're assembling a Coalition
of the Willing tp threaten polluters.

"We're certainly not bowing the knee to the damn Chinese -- they own
our Treasury, unfortunately, but we completely change the terms of that
debate. When the Chinese open a coal mine and threaten the world's
children with asthma, we will take out that threat with a cruise
missile!  

*That's our new negotiating position on the climate crisis: we're the
military, macho hard line.

*"Suddenly we Americans sound like the grown-ups in the room again. 
Of course we don't have to really battle China -- they're already both
much browner and much greener than we are.  The Chinese get on board in
a hurry, because they're run by engineers who can understand climate
math.

*It's only the obstreperous, the planet's hopelessly stupid -- the
tiny minority who truly think and act like George Bush -- who get
hammered under the new dispensation.

*"Everybody who's factually wrecking the planet gets redefined, by us,
as a 'rogue state' or a 'climate terrorist.' Instead of that cynical
war for oil that we have unfortunately lost, we have a new war against
oil that we might conceivably win."

*Now: I'm not saying this position is good or correct. I'm saying its
appearance is probably necessary, and it would be a sign of political
health in the United States of America.  

*For the Right to stuff climate change into its Scopes-trial monkey 
bag was fatally stupid.  Katrina alone was calamitous for them.  The
Right are gonna need a lot of face-saving to come to terms with the
agonizing inconvenient truth.  Somebody's gonna have to create that
political position for them. It's got to be phraseable in their own
language.

*In the American Civil Cold War, neither side will ever be able to
annihilate the other.  The Confederacy just enjoyed  eight awful years
in power.  As usual, it screwed up.  It's precious way of life is Going
with the Wind as we speak, and for  all the usual reasons: the raw
ignorance, the blatant injustice, the gut-level instincts and the raw
belligerence. The Right is gonna have to crawl back to Tara now.  It's
gonna have to make a new dress out of its drapes.  

*Somebody genuinely concerned with what  climate change means to a
suffering mankind --  as  opposed to a concern for all-organic green
righteousness, -- probably ought to go help them.  God knows they'll
never get there alone.
  
## 75 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 09 10:56

    
>>>
essentially lets deniers define the terms
of the discussion -- which of course is what they've largely succeeded
at
doing so far.
<<<

I don't think I agree that they've defined the terms of the discussion
overall, though I agree that they've managed to sustain the sense that
there's a debate.

Re the "issue with calling an understanding based on the best
scientific evidence a 'belief,'" I'm not sure what else you would call
it. In fact hypothesis is a belief that you try to prove, and the more
and better proof/evidence you have, the better sense you have that you
actually know something that's true. But there's a fuzzy line between
belief and truth, I think.
  
## 76 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 6 Jan 09 11:47

    
#74 Best post yet, Mr. Sterling.  You sound more like an
entrepreneurial we-can-change-the-world hippie than a derisive
cyberpunkster! 

<When everything is "green," nothing is green.>  This gets back to how
we frame the debate, e.g. The "green" Cadillac Escalade Hybrid.  Yet,
global environmental degradation is a fact on the planet. So, whether
we call the solutions "green", "sustainable," or "appropriate",  The
technological apes, collectively, need to behave better, or the earthly
Gaian Mind is not going to survive its eco-cancer of the brain.

<But we steal the Left's clothes on the all-important energy issue --
because they're congenitally unable to build or sell a damn thing.">

Yeah baby!  This is where the idealistic hippies of yore do need to
grow up.  This is where the pragmatics of what they got right with
"the-last-whole-earth" ethos needs to hit the ground with market
realities.  This is where we begin to break out of the old
socialist/capitalist paradigm and be part of a new pragmatic synthesis.
  
## 77 of 177: (jacob) Tue 6 Jan 09 12:19

    <hidden>
  
## 78 of 177: Steve Bjerklie (stevebj) Tue 6 Jan 09 12:30

    
Interesting. Thanks, <jacob>.
  
## 79 of 177: (jacob) Tue 6 Jan 09 12:36

    
#77 is a side note on the silliness of complaining about the Escalade
Hybrid.

Environmentalists (among which I count myself) should be looking at
incremental engineering solutions.  For instance the substitution of
natural gas for coal greatly reduces CO2 emissions, but because gas is
still a CO2-producing fossil fuel, there hasn't been much green enthusiasm
for that change.  Even though I am guessing (too lazy to look up the
numbers) that it has done more to reduce CO2 output than all the renewables
currently online.  And that tends to enhance the suspicions of others that
the climate change issue is a stalking horse for a blanket opposition to
resource extraction.  That's a dangerous belief for people to have, because
most people see resource extraction as a necessary part of our current
technological civilization, and so you start talking about ending
extractive industries and they start thinking about how they don't want to
live in a yurt.
  
## 80 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 6 Jan 09 12:37

    
OK, Jacob, perhaps the Cadillac Escalade is not the perfect example,
but don't miss the point. The big three American automakers have done a
piss poor job of addressing where we need to go, mainly because there
have been too many consumers willing to buy gas guzzlers, and too
little pressure from government forcing them to meet fuel efficiency
standards.  

As 'green' becomes chic and watered down, we think we are being
environmentally sensitive when we have so far to go.  On the other
hand, at least the new popularity of "green" allows for a level of true
"green" activism from within the system.  I sense that this is what
Bruce is recommending in #74.  This "greening" is an opportunity that
didn't exist a few years ago.  
  
## 81 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 09 15:44

    
When the Southeast Asian Tsunami struck, there was no tsunami warning
system for the Indian Ocean. Over a quarter million people died, over a
million were displaced. Scientists understood the potential danger but
nobody'd acted on that knowledge. Tilly Smith, a ten-year-old British
girl on vacation with her parents, studied tsunamis in school, knew the
warning signs, and saved a beachload of people. Where are the Tilly
Smiths for global warming? We need a whole army.

Emily's right, many adopt reusable bags and are diligent about
recycling, and think that's enough. And Scott has a good point about a
green that's diluted, not enough "when we have so far to go." Even the
most dedicated green activists often haven't reduced their footprint to
one earth or less. I don't think we know how to do it, most of us. We
need the Tillys, or a bright green version of the Boy Scouts/Girl
Scouts/Junior Woodchucks, to earn their merit badges by showing us the
way to zero energy, zero waste, low carbon output.

Bruce, you didn't say much about the new novel. Sounds like it's
closer to pure science fiction than the last couple. What were your
sources of inspiration for thie one?
  
## 82 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Tue 6 Jan 09 18:18

    
from Terry Walker

Do you see any evidence that intelligentsia in any 1st-world nation are
finally realizing that any economy based on an exponential model (money
loaned-with-interest into existence, for example) must fail by definition?
Do you expect a non-exponential economic system to become a world player in
the next decade, or are we doomed to repeat the last century using the same
model that's designed to fail?

- Terry Walker
  
## 83 of 177: (dana) Tue 6 Jan 09 21:45

    
Frank writes:

I'm thoroughly enjoying this, to the point where I thought I'd de-lurk
and post a couple of notes.
Background: I'm one of those practitioners of the "sorta" science of
ecology, and I'd pitch in a quote and a few observations that might be
relevant.

The non-verbatim quote is from Rackham and Grove's Nature of
Mediterranean Europe:An Ecological History, which really should be read
by more non-ecologists.  Their comment was to the effect that making a
farm sustainable was easy.  All you have to do is tell the family that
owns their farm that they and all their descendants have to make their
living off the land, and that they would not be able to sell it or buy
more land.

This statement might be meant in irony, but it's true.  There have been
a number of sustainable societies in the past.  They had to be
sustainable.  The alternative was starvation, and since often the
children died before their parents, there was a strong incentive for the
adults to do the right thing.

This applies to discussions about making a sustainable society.  Aside
from (possibly) Tokugawa Japan, I'm unaware of a society that performed
a top-down reorganization along sustainable lines.  For those who think
they can design a sustainable society, I'd suggest that they need to
find examples of societies that have designed themselves into
sustainability without the specter of starvation driving them to do it.
If such societies exist, we need to learn how they did it.  It might not
be pretty, either.

There are a bunch of other points to be learned from Rackham and Grove.
One tidbit I'd throw out is that, in the Mediterranean, there seems to
be a roughly 300-year cycle of people coming together in tight cities
(often for mutual protection), followed by spreading out into the
countryside (to be nearer their farms in expanding populations, and to
farm more marginal land).  I wonder if such a cycle shows up elsewhere?
It would certainly make urban planning easier.  It's also worth pointing
out that the northern Mediterranean was more populous 100 years ago than
it is now, and there are a lot of marginal farmland under brush in the
hills of Cypress and elsewhere.  The great thing about this book is that
it provides a truly long-term perspective on how civilization interacts
with nature, and that's something that seems to be missing from
discussions right now.

Another thing I'd pitch in is an "intro to ecology" exercise that I've
been lucky to teach.  It's basically about the logistic equation,
otherwise known as exponential growth to carrying capacity.  The
exercise is letting the students tinker with the parameters of the
equation to see what happens.  And yes, most of them do get bored.
However, there is a neat point.  Usually, this is a model of population
growth.  If the population grows too fast, it overshoots its carrying
capacity, then falls well below its carrying capacity.  If the
oscillation is too violent the population goes extinct, and usually a
violent oscillation is caused by too-rapid growth.

While extrapolation between fields is dangerous, I keep thinking about
that classroom exercise when I read about economic bubbles.  See, it's
really, really hard to determine carrying capacity in advance, at least
in ecological systems, and I suspect that's also true in financial
systems.  Assuming you don't know what the limits are, the sane solution
is to *slow down growth rates* because when you hit a limit, the
overshoot and crash isn't so severe.  Sound like a good idea for
financial markets?

As I recall, we had a bunch of New Deal-era regulation in place that did
just that, and over the last two decades, this legislation has been
systematically dismantled.  Perhaps this is something we need to think
about in our designs for a new society?  There's a good reason to keep
growth rates fairly low.

Comments?

I'm really enjoying this, and it's been inspiring to read both the
comments and the literature cited.  Thanks!
  
## 84 of 177: Hugh Watkins (hughw1936uk) Wed 7 Jan 09 02:05

    
Bruce
a 300 year cycle?
in that period there could be mini ice ages, plagues, famines and
political transformations 

"All you have to do is tell the family . .  ."  in other words a
command economy like USSR with internal passports  . . . 

which is a proven route to disaster.

The chaos of capitalism and the value of bankrupcy as a feed back self
regulating mechanism should not be underrated.

The fossils of the Burgess Shale suggested to me that the post
darwinian theory of evolution is a reduction of diversity, which could
also applied to ecology.

Major attempts at designing a new society from the top have all ended
in tears, it is far better to muddle through.

As the sea rises we shall all adopt dutch technology of enclosures and
dykes - with motorways running along the tops of the sea walls.
  
## 85 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 09 06:36

    
So much of history describes a world without an Internet, or if you've
read Teilhard et al, you might say a world without a noosphere. We're
connected in ways we couldn't connect before, and while the state and
degree of connection doesn't necessarily change human nature, the
social infrastructure or ecology is so transformed that I think it's
hard to generalize from past behaviors of relatively isolated
individuals and communities.

My colleagues and I have been discussing the relationship of social
media to sustainability. David Armistead notes that, in the industrial
economy, we made money by extracting resources and applying labor to
materials. We assumed the resources were abundant. In a cradle to
cradle sustainability economy, we'll make money by applying knowledge,
engineering solutions that get maximum performance and maximum
efficiency from any resource. So a sustainability economy depends on
knowledge and innovation, and the value of knowledge is enhanced by
interaction... the role of social media. (It's never just that simple,
but that's a high-level view of what we've been thinking.)

What happens when Frank's farm family, or those folks in the
Mediterranean, are wired - globally connected, with many feedback
channels, and many opportunities to gain and share knowledge within
their community, but also globally?

(I haven't read _Hot, Flat, and Crowded_, but I think Friedman is on
this track.)
  
## 86 of 177: Teneo, Ergo Dubito (robertflink) Wed 7 Jan 09 08:53

    
If hubris has a role in human affairs, do we expect it to increase or
decrease in 2009?  The financial meltdown would suggest that hubris has
been somewhat of a problem recently.  Would a bit of humility help or
hurt us in the future?  Will any achievement(?) of general humility be
done in by the next boom? 

Perhaps we can brazen it through. ;-)
 
  
## 87 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 09 11:05

    
"This applies to discussions about making a sustainable society. 
Aside
from (possibly) Tokugawa Japan, I'm unaware of a society that
performed
a top-down reorganization along sustainable lines."

*A look at Jared Diamond's COLLAPSE might help here.  One
dares to hope for a nifty sequel called UNCOLLAPSEABLE.
  
## 88 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 09 11:16

    
"Do you see any evidence that intelligentsia in any 1st-world nation
are finally realizing that any economy based on an exponential model
(money loaned-with-interest into existence, for example) must fail by
definition?
"Do you expect a non-exponential economic system to become a world
player in the next decade, or are we doomed to repeat the last century
using the same model that's designed to fail?"


*Well, I'm not an enthusiast for economic systems designed from first
principles by first-world intelligentsia.  I mean, let 'em design
something small and harmless first -- like a decent faculty lounge, run
by intelligentsia.

*As for global-scale players, yeah -- I don't want to hammer away at
this, but "commons-based peer production" (we could wish for a shorter
term) is global.  It also kinda works in a local-barnraising regional
way, but I suspect it works best in the framework of what some people
(cue Jamais Cascio) call a "translocal community."  

Also, if you knock off work when your software project forks, the code
just sits there.  Whereas if you try that with an Amish barn the cows
will freeze.  Clearly is nice when the "commons" being constructed is
abstract and sitting around in the dusty corners of a bunch of servers
somewhere.  Or when it can fit in your pocket.  

*It is a new means of industrial production and potentially a
different economic order; maybe there's less to it than meets the eye,
but it's new, so, as a futurist, I'm necessarily interested.  If I were
a guy who was in earnest about "fighting market capitalism," I don't
think I'd throw any bricks at the cops. I think I'd be devoting my
efforts to removing the market price from goods and services, and the
commons offers methods for that.
  
## 89 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Wed 7 Jan 09 11:35

    

Starting with you.   So: leave journalism. Stop preaching to the green
choir.  Be brave. Suffer.  Leave your big green groups.  Go into big
business  or big governance.

----

Funny -- Last year a a good-works oriented friend bought me lunch and
picked my brain on getting a job in the clean power sector.  I suggested
she go work for GE for 2 or 3 or 5 years; not only would she be able to
sock money away against lean years later on with a venture-funded start-up,
but she'd get experience that such a company might really value enough to
hire someone who has it.

Funny, she didn't seem to like this advice.

(Journalist, heal thyself.)
  
## 90 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 09 11:40

    
I'm also seeing more modest businesses targeting other modest
businesses, people more committed to doing something cool than making a
million bucks. And instead of investing in hard infrastructure, more
new companies are showing up in coworking spaces, where they rub
shoulders with other coworking adherents and create new creative
synergies in a context that's already a new way of doing things. A
bunch of guys in Austin decided there should be a coworking company, so
they rented a big house on East 7th, set it up with a wifi network and
plenty of caffeine, plus whatever else you might need for your
business to incubate. They call it Conjunctured, and it's part of a
network of coworking facilities, as well as looser coworking groups
that meet in coffeeshops, that are popping up across the U.S. I know
more and more people how never hire anybody, they just build a team of
dependable contractors and get to work. And they all want to figure out
how to make money, but they're not thinking about funding houses in
the suburbs and multicar families. The world our parents knew, and we
knew, is fading, and they can see that. And they'd rather have freedom
than stuff.

(Emily slipped in. Emily, I've been hanging around clean tech industry
types, and I'm thinking they're just oilmen with computers instead of
drills.)
  
## 91 of 177: (jacob) Wed 7 Jan 09 12:17

    
Hmm, I'm all for coworking and new ways of getting things done, but I sure
want a house in the suburbs and a multicar family.  Well, I already have
those things, so what I really mean is that I'd like to continue to have
them.  Living in the city center is great when you can live in a couple of
hundred sq ft, when you're young and single, but if you want a
garage-workshop and >1000 sq ft, you really need to be a millionaire to do
that in San Francisco.  That's the problem with fantasies of new creative
urbanism - it attracts business types like flies, and those people do tend
to be very motivated by money, which means they can outbid the
non-money-motivated types for housing.  Eventually this process kills the
golden goose, at least for a while - San Francisco I think just went
through one of those cycles.  Anyway, I'm not a millionaire, so I live in
the suburbs.

But I actually think the older streetcar suburbs are well-suited to this
pattern of work too, being dense enough to make commutes very short and
public transit practical, with plenty of commercial space available at much
lower rents than the city centers.  There's a reason why HP, Microsoft and
Apple started in suburban garages rather than city center lofts.  I think
it's good to look at cities as a continuum of densities rather than making
a sharp urban/suburban split.  That whole "we're urban! we hate the
suburbs!" thing isn't very useful.  Cities provide lots of services to
suburbs: financial concentration, high-end retail, major hospitals, urban
universities - but the suburbs play a part too: sprawling university
campuses, garbage transfer stations, warehouses and transhipment
facilities, and modern manufacturing industries, not to mention massive
amounts of housing.  Cities need both to survive.  Denser suburbs are an
important part of the metropolitan ecology, not least for relieving the
pressure on housing prices.

And even some of the newer subdivisions look like they could be adapted to
a more livable pattern. We may mock the identical boxes crammed in close to
one another, but at least they're dense.  There's potential there.

Now, exurbs, McMansions, 1/4 acre lots, those I'm not such a fan of.  The
motivation for buying those is almost always conspicuous consumption, which
isn't even fun for the person doing it.  The urge to show off through
overconsumption is a pathological drive.  But I do agree that it's less
present in the younger generation, though hardly absent.
  
## 92 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 09 12:58

    
Yes, I get it - affordable hip urbanism might mean living somewhere
other than San Francisco (or NYC or LA). Austin's explosive creativity
of the moment will probably go gray as the cost of living spirals
upward.

Choosing not to live in a suburban house with a few cars and kids !=
"we hate the suburbs," necessarily, it's just a different choice. I'm a
greybeard who did the suburban multicar thing, and it wasn't a bad
life, though it wasn't very energy efficient. Part of the argument for
a "new urbanism" is that it's supposedly more sustainable.

You have a great point - we don't have to build surburban
neighborhoods inefficiently, new patterns can and should evolve. Better
mass transit would help. When I was living in Boulder, you could hop a
bus to Denver - mass transit in that part of the world is Amazing,
compared to the Austin area, where buses are empty and bus routes are
extremely, even laughably, inconvenient. (We do have wifi on some
buses, at least).

Collaborative urban planning here has give us some pretty interesting
neighborhoods; I expect to see significant change in local urban design
over the next decade.

The urge to show of through overconsumption may dwindle when it's more
of a struggle to put bread on the table. Let's see how the economy
plays out. Remember Ernest Callenbach's _Living Poor with Style_? Is
that possible today.

(If I had more time, I would add another paragraph or two about
Buddhist Economics and Voluntary Simplicity...)

Bruce, what's life like in Torino?
  
## 93 of 177: (dana) Wed 7 Jan 09 14:38

    
It would be nice if Obama would give William McDonough Detroit, New
Orleans, and a bucket of cash and let him demonstrate his C2C
principles in those blighted US cities.

I'd also like to see that sort of thing in some of the burbs around
California, and likely other states as well. 
  
## 94 of 177: (dana) Wed 7 Jan 09 14:38

    
Yannis S. writes:

re: hubris
Check this little essay on hubris's scary dark twin (by Brian Eno, of
all
people -- not usually one to turn to for previsions of calamity):
 
http://www.edge.org/q2009/q09_10.html#eno
  
## 95 of 177: (dana) Wed 7 Jan 09 14:40

    
George Mokray writes:

Back in the day, my Clamshell Alliance affinity group had a meeting  
with the John Birch Society.  We thought that since they were all  
about states rights and local control that they might be amenable to  
opposing the Federal push for nuclear power in NH and other places.   
Wasn't a productive meeting.

However, I have your right-wing infiltration slogan right here:

Solar IS Civil Defense

I even have stickers and buttons if anyone's interested.  By civil  
defense, I mean flashlight, radio, cell phone, and an extra set of  
batteries all solar powered with a possible hand crank or bike pedaled
dynamo for back up.  That's a reliable source of low voltage DC
electricity day or night by sunlight or muscle power.

In fact, we've distributed close to one million solar/dynamo am/fm/sw
radios in Afghanistan since before the invasion.  Each one could be  
modified to charge AA and other dry cell batteries to provide  
auxiliary battery power.  Been trying for the last couple of years to
interest somebody in NATO, the Pentagon, or my Congresscritters in the
idea.  They don't seem to understand it.  Too small I guess. Solar as
an anti-terror or at least anti-Taliban tactic, that could be pretty
cool.

More at
http://solarray.blogspot.com/2008/05/solar-is-civil-defense-illustrated.html
  
## 96 of 177: la brujaja (zorca) Wed 7 Jan 09 16:41

    
the trick, for me at least, is not getting discouraged. which can sometimes
be a challenge.

i worry that with the worsening economy, incentives for greening are going
to wither. obama will be hard-pressed to tax fuels or police emissions, at
least for the first couple of years. u.s. auto makers are unlikely to retool
to greener vehicles with whatever bailout monies they manage to win. add to
this lower gas prices and middle-class tax rebates and you have consumer
demand for the same old gas guzzlers. meanwhile, the history channel
launches the new year with a week-long 'countdown to armageddon' fear fest
that's bound to leave many with a 'why bother' aftertaste. it's all well and
good to use recycled bags, but meanwhile, hell:handbasket.

so i'm glad bruce comes here once a year. i always walk away amused,
enthused, and oddly recharged. thanks, bruce. can't wait to read the new
novel.
  
## 97 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Wed 7 Jan 09 17:43

    
From Frank, again....

@Bruce: Yes, I actually got the Tokugawa example from Jared Diamond's
Collapse, thanks.

What I find fascinating is that what I wrote got taken completely out of
context, in some fascinating ways.  One basic point is that with the one
exception, I don't know of anyone who went sustainable without facing the
threat of starvation.  The thing about starvation is that it happens slowly
enough that it's a great motivator, especially if you have hungry kids who
are begging you to feed them.  Unfortunately, starvation also weeds out
everyone who gets it wrong.

Given our track record, I think it's unlikely that we will make a
sustainable society without dealing with mass global starvation.  The one
ray of light is the Tokugawa, who used a command and control approach
(ahem!) to make Japan sustainable for a few centuries.

If this doesn't scare you, just think about it: starvation and dictatorship
seem to be the only proven ways to make people go sustainable.

I hope there's a third way.  Fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh ways would be
nice too, just in case.  I'd suggest that we spend some time looking to see
if other people have found other ways.  It's nice to have models to work
from.

As for my Mediterranean farmers, this is a great example of  mutual
incomprehension.  Basically, I'm quoting an ecologist who says that, when
something forces people to make a living off of a plot of land forever, they
quickly learn to manage it sustainably.  This has nothing to do with
politics, old-style economics, or the historical lack of the internet. This
was an observation by a really good ecologist (better than I am), about what
it takes to force people to live sustainably.  Moreover, it is no more and
no less than the state that the human species finds itself in.  We have to
make a living off of planet Earth, forever.  We are that Mediterranean farm
family, and we can't avoid the problem by changing our political system, nor
by getting work blogging on the InterStellarNet to get food from friends at
Tau Ceti C.

I'd also point out to Mr. Watkins (#84), that, unfortunately for all
political theorists, we live in something very much like a command and
control universe.  The commands are the laws of physics, and the controls
are the amounts of energy and elements we get to play with on our planet.
While human representation of physical laws is imperfect, no sane person
denies them.  You simply can't break the law of gravity.  Similarly, there's
only so much fresh water in the world, and while you can make water potable,
that costs energy and materials, both of which are limited.  The basic point
is that to be sustainable, you have to be able to work within the limits to
make a living, whatever sets those limits.  I understand that the example of
a Mediterranean farmer sounds very much like something a stupid feudal lord
would do (and oddly enough, that is what happened in some places), but
nature pulls the same trick on all of us in the absence of stupid overlords.

Anyway, this is pulling the discussion away from interesting questions about
designing a society.  I thought I'd better clear this up.
  
## 98 of 177: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Wed 7 Jan 09 21:15

    

>*As for global-scale players, yeah -- I don't want to hammer away at
 this, but "commons-based peer production" (we could wish for a shorter
 term) is global.  It also kinda works in a local-barnraising regional
 way, but I suspect it works best in the framework of what some people
 (cue Jamais Cascio) call a "translocal community."<

"Think locally, act globally."

Intelligentsia-designed political structures don't seem to manifest in ways
that would be recognizable to the designers. Novel political and political-
economic structures tend instead to be emergent, then described later.
  
## 99 of 177: Hugh Watkins (hughw1936uk) Thu 8 Jan 09 00:13

    
My whole point is  designing a society is as hopeless a task as
designing the english language by a self appointed academy

The "laws of physics" are like the descriptions of "God", a wonderful
human invention notnecessarily true in detail.

If you remember the  great breakthrough in the history of the
invention of the radio amplifiern was "Negative feedback counteracts
the positive feedback in valve circuits. " (Wiki)

in an effective mixed economy - partly capitalist and partly socialist
- bankrupcy and politics have that effect

Rising tides will inspire solutions, but when eg Bangledesh is
submerged where will the refugees go?
  
## 100 of 177: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 8 Jan 09 01:34

    
re: "And instead of investing in hard infrastructure, more
new companies are showing up in coworking spaces, where they rub
shoulders with other coworking adherents and create new creative
synergies in a context that's already a new way of doing things. A
bunch of guys in Austin decided there should be a coworking company,
so
they rented a big house [...]"

But the hard infrastructure is still there; someone's the landlord for
that house.  And if you meet in coffee shops, that means more coffee
shops and the people who run them, not to mention electricity and
laptops and cell phones and cell phone towers.

It's more fun and probably more efficient, but someone still has to
keep the infrastructure going, and they still get paid.  So you get a
different division of labor with small networked capitalism running in
an environment maintained by someone else, with a lot of routine
transactions acting as the glue.
  
## 101 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 09 03:19

    
Brian, no disagreement here, I didn't say that nobody's investing in
hard infrastructure. It's good to acknowledge that the infrastructure
is still there, and there's new business opportunity in managing an
infrastructure that's decoupled from the businesses that use it. So you
get something like Launchpad Coworking:
http://blog.launchpadcoworking.com/

Does this sort of thing relate to Frank's point about
starvation/dictatorship driving sustainability? Which sort of relates
to the point about denial that global warming's a real threat, which is
more like waiting until it's too late - until the problem is in your
face - before you take action.

If you're faced with imminent starvation, the issue of sustainability
is more broadly obvious and readily addressed.  If you're not faced
with starvation and and only a few have the foresight to see why
sustainable systems are necessary to keep the goose alive and well and
laying those shiny eggs, those few can assert their understanding
through dictatorship and make sustainability happen.

(Here I'm envisioning a different telling of "Jaws," wherein a more
aggressive sheriff Roy Scheider pulls a gun, jails Murray Hamilton and
his city council, declares martial law and closes the beaches.)

Can we create a sustainable society (or, as Armistead and I say, a
sustainability economy), and in the Bright Green way, emphasize that
there's business opportunity in sustainability, so the markets are on
board, big business is on board, and you have a shared understanding
(no doubt facilitated, in part, by social media) driving the move to
sustainable solutions?

So there are these options, I think: the mayor's in denial and the
shark eats a few kids, or the sheriff stages a coup and closes the
beaches... or everybody's texting and blogging and tweeting about the
shark, and the beaches are empty, regardless of any action on Roy
Scheider's part, and despite Murray Hamilton's denial. And that's what
we mean when we say the Internet makes a difference.
  
## 102 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Thu 8 Jan 09 04:00

    <scribbled by lrph Thu 8 Jan 09 08:26>
  
## 103 of 177: (dana) Thu 8 Jan 09 07:13

    
(previous post from offsite reader Lachlan Yeates)
  
## 104 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Thu 8 Jan 09 08:26

    
Repost from offsite reader Lachlan Yeates (from Scribbled post <102>
due to technical difficulties.....)  


When Confucius was asked the first thing he would do upon taking
office, he
replied that he would "rectify names", as "If names are not rectified
then language will not flow. If language does not flow, then affairs
cannot
be completed." In the same way, whenever we try and talk about thing
"new economics of the commons," it is nearly impossible to have a
sensible discussion, as not only are there no precedents to work with,
there
are not even any words to discuss it with, sort of like newspeak in
reverse.
It was part of the reason novel concepts such as democracy and atheism
took
so long to get off the ground, as the relevant concepts could not be
adequately expressed.

If we are to seek some precedents, I suggest the classics. The
politicians
of ancient Athens gained power by supporting the needy, starting
schools and
building public monuments. The concept of "gravitas," so inherent in
the
Roman system, important enough to cause Caesar to march on Rome, has
disappeared from the English language, and has found no replacement.

Perhaps Sarko and Obama are a new type of politician riding on the
blogosphere?
  
## 105 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 09 08:35

    

"Last year a a good-works oriented friend bought me lunch and
picked my brain on getting a job in the clean power sector.  I
suggested she go work for GE for 2 or 3 or 5 years; not only would she
be able to sock money away against lean years later on with a
venture-funded start-up,  she'd get experience that such a company
might really value enough to hire someone who has it.

"Funny, she didn't seem to like this advice.  (Journalist, heal
thyself.)"


*Well, General Electric is very into electricity.  I'm not saying your
friend should have gone to work there.  I *am* saying that you can't
change methods of generating electricity by standing at a coal mine
with a reporters' notepad.

*It may very well be that green-energy roughnecks are mostly energy
roughnecks rather than conscientious social activists. West Texas
wind-boom guys are the children of West Texas oil-boom guys. Most
serious solar-power guys I've met look and act like roofing
contractors.  

*I'm sure this is deeply regrettable in some ways, but do you really
wanna climb ladders and bolt unwieldy panels to rooftops?  You don't?

*Then maybe -- given that this is necessary labor you're unwilling and
unable to do -- maybe your proper attitude ought to be one of respect
and support for such people.  

*One ought to be especially careful about any snotty white-collar
dismissals of green-collar activity.  For the people with wrenches and
hammers, commentators trying to solve  big problems with technosocial
conscientious transformation don’t necessarily sound like brilliant
symbolic analysts.   They tend to  come across like gabby,
granola-munching mandarins.
  
## 106 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 09 08:38

    

"Bruce, what's life like in Torino?"

*Man, I could write a book.  Which is kinda the idea.

*But to stick to the urban-suburban topic (which I'm enjoying), this
is a car town.  Torino is the Detroit of Italy.  The car biz collapsed
in the 1980s.  The blue-collar assembly guys all left.  About ten years
ago foreigners started showing up  --  emigres, all kinds. There's a
small army of us in here now, a hundred thousand.

*In my neighborhood the Chinese are feeding the Peruvians.
Demographically its like a little London almost.  But unlike London
which has been polyglot and imperial for centuries, this is just 90s
globalization that's packed into a downtown that was in sharp decline.
It's more like a jumbled warehouse of nations than a multinational
community.

*Also, I have no car in Torino, this car town.  I haven't had a car
since 2005.  I have no plans to get a car, and I kinda hope I never own
a car again.  I walk most places,  I take trams, and really, I suspect
that giving up a car helped my health almost as much as giving up
smoking.  For a guy in his mid-50s I can walk like nobody's business.

Getting out of the car is of those actions that sound like a big
painful sacrifice,  but if you can beat that cruel addiction,  it
improves your quality of life quite radically.
  
## 107 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 09 08:41

    

"Bruce: Yes, I actually got the Tokugawa example from Jared Diamond's
Collapse, thanks. (...)

"Given our track record, I think it's unlikely that we will make a
sustainable society without dealing with mass global starvation.  The
one
ray of light is the Tokugawa, who used a command and control approach
(ahem!) to make Japan sustainable for a few centuries.

"If this doesn't scare you, just think about it: starvation and
dictatorship
seem to be the only proven ways to make people go sustainable."

*Dude, you're just not scaring me here.  Sorry.

*If you've read Jared Diamond's book, why aren't you talking about
Iceland? Iceland is an ecological success in his lights.  Iceland has
the world's oldest democratic Parliament, instead of this repulsive
Tokugawa feudal spy society you seem to want to valorize.  

*The idea that Tokugawa Japan is some kind of model society for
moderns, I find that frankly ludicrous.  Tokugawa society is a very
interesting study -- everything in Japan is fascinating --  but there
is just no way we're venturing into a feudally-based, hand-powered
society with an economy of koku rice measures and third-hand
Confucianism.  

*These guys weren't ecological model-farmers: they didn't understand
the mechanics of rainfall, much less nitrogen fixation.  And while they
were "commanding and controlling" their underlings, they were so
deliberately ignorant of all developments elsewhere that a couple of
American steamboats were enough to traumatize them utterly.  What the
heck is "sustainable" about that?

I reiterate that if you can't imagine how things might change, you
don't get lack of change, you get changes that are unimaginable.
Tokugawa Japan isn't our global post-starvation future.  It's the
poster child for getting blown away by unimaginable change.
  
## 108 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 09 08:43

    

*Every time I get a new announcement from EDGE.ORG, I promise myself
that I won't kill hours reading it, and almost every time I get
seduced.

*Their latest BIG QUESTION at Edge asks about developments that will
change everything within the respondent's lifetime.

I noticed that Yochai Benkler, "Mr Commons-Based Peer Production,"
weighed in.  So I quote him.


"Free market ideology

"This is not a technical innovation but a change in realm of ideas.
The resurgence of free market ideology, after its demise in the Great
Depression, came to dominance between the 1970s and the late 1990s as a
response to communism. As communism collapsed, free market ideology
triumphantly declared its dominance. In the U.S. And the UK it
expressed itself, first, in the Reagan/Thatcher moment; and then was
generalized in the Clinton/Blair turn to define their own moment in
terms of integrating market-based solutions as the core institutional
innovation of the “left.” 

"It expressed itself in Europe through the competition-focused, free
market policies of the technocratic EU Commission; and in global
systems through the demands and persistent reform recommendations of
the World Bank, the IMF, and the world trade system through the WTO. 

"But within less than two decades, its force as an idea is declining. 

"On the one hand, the Great Deflation of 2008 has shown the utter
dependence of human society on the possibility of well-functioning
government to assure some baseline stability in human welfare and
capacity to plan for the future. 

"On the other hand, a gradual rise in volunteerism and cooperation,
online and offline, is leading to a reassessment of what motivates
people, and how governments, markets, and social dynamics interoperate.


"I expect the binary State/Market conception of the way we organize
our large systems to give way to a more fluid set of systems, with
greater integration of the social and commercial; as well as of the
state and the social. So much of life, in so many of our societies, was
structured around either market mechanisms or state bureaucracies. The
emergence of new systems of social interaction will affect what we do,
and where we turn for things we want to do, have, and experience."



*Sounds pretty comprehensive, eh?  As a "sci fi futurist" and "design
visionary" and all that, I really dig it when I come across in contrast
as this very low-key, equivocating, maybe-so maybe not kind of figure.
  
## 109 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Thu 8 Jan 09 09:40

    
<snotty white-collar dismissals of green-collar activity.

They tend to  come across like gabby,
granola-munching mandarins.>


That sounds much more "snotty" to me than Benkler's depiction of the
core issue: "the way we organize our large systems to give way to a
more fluid set of systems, with greater integration of the social and
commercial."  

For example, of course the "green" initiatives of Commander-In-Chief
Obama will require the rank-and-file to implement the directives, and,
in between, the whole campaign will need to be sold to a taxpaying,
consuming public.  And, on the ground, maybe some longhair artisan type
will figure out how to install the raw solar panels with an eye for
functional aesthetics.   
  
## 110 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 09 11:11

    
American right-wing guys who hate oil.  Okay, mostly they hate
Saudis, but that's how it plays out for them.


CITIZENS FOR ENERGY FREEDOM


We're pleased to extend an invitation to you from our Coalition member
Citizens for Energy Freedom to its first conference, which will be
held on the weekend of January 17 and 18, 2009 in Jupiter, FL. 

* Meet others who want to win independence; link up with them to form
local and national organizations to win the battle against the oil
cartel. 

* Hear from leading experts on energy independence trends in
economics, environment, technology, national security and politics. 

* Take training workshops on: how to deal with press and politicians;
form local, state-wide, and regional chapters of the new organization;
and launch our campaign from coast to coast. 

Special rates are available for seniors and students. 

Make your reservation today at 

http://www.citizensforenergyfreedom.org/html/conference.html 

and get a special rate at the West Palm Beach Marriott Hotel.



THE SET AMERICA FREE COALITION brings together prominent individuals
and non-profit organizations concerned about the security and economic
implications of America's growing dependence on foreign oil. The
coalition promotes a blueprint which spells out practical ways in which
real progress toward energy security can be made over the next several
years. 
Find us on the web at http://www.setamericafree.org 

To get Set America Free updates by email click here. 
  
## 111 of 177: gabby, granola-munching mandarin (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 09 11:30

    
I'm on the run right now, but I have to chime in to say how much I
resonate with Benkler's last paragraph. He's a guy who should be in
Obama's cabinet. Social Integration Czar.
  
## 112 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Thu 8 Jan 09 11:33

    


*Well, General Electric is very into electricity.  I'm not saying your
 friend should have gone to work there.  I *am* saying that you can't
 change methods of generating electricity by standing at a coal mine with a
 reporters' notepad.


I might decamp to big business or big government at some time or another
(and no reason to debate it further); given the state of journalism, I may
have to. but standing around with a notepad might not be *totally*
useless.  Reporting in the wake of the one billion gallon coal sludge spill
in Tennessee has certainly made visible all the unregulated coal ash ponds
across the country, which weren't on the tips of anyone's tongues before.

300 acres of once-pleasant countryside and scenic rivers drowned under
toxic black mud is a much more visceral disaster than 384 ppm of CO2 in the
atmosphere.  And if reasonably objective reporting gets those photos and
video out to a mass audience (which it has), instead of just the usual deep
green suspects, and contributes momentum to retiring coal-fired power, then
journalism helped changed methods of generating electricity.

Why are you a journalist?  Why am I?  At least partly because we're pretty
good at it, as verified by the fact that people pay us to do it.  And since
there are many easier ways to make just as little money, probably we kind
of like it -- or at least like doing something we're good at.
  
## 113 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Fri 9 Jan 09 03:44

    
From Frank again.

--snip--
"Given our track record, I think it's unlikely that we will make a
sustainable society without dealing with mass global starvation.  The
one
ray of light is the Tokugawa, who used a command and control approach
(ahem!) to make Japan sustainable for a few centuries.

"If this doesn't scare you, just think about it: starvation and
dictatorship seem to be the only proven ways to make people go sustainable."

*Dude, you're just not scaring me here.  Sorry.

*If you've read Jared Diamond's book, why aren't you talking about
Iceland? Iceland is an ecological success in his lights.  Iceland has
the world's oldest democratic Parliament, instead of this repulsive
Tokugawa feudal spy society you seem to want to valorize.

--Hmmm, since I got the example of
 the Tokugawa from Collapse, it should be
self-evident that I read the book.  I don't particularly lionize the
Tokugawa
I'm just pointing out that it's the only society that I know of (someone
please find another
example for me!) that didn't get to sustainability through famine.  Iceland
doesn't qualify
because they had at least one bout of famine.  There are lots of cultures
that have learned
through famine (including the others that Diamond cites, such as the New
Guinea Highlands).

I'm hoping there's an alternative that doesn't involve command/control or
starvation.

*The idea that Tokugawa Japan is some kind of model society for
moderns, I find that frankly ludicrous.  Tokugawa society is a very
interesting study -- everything in Japan is fascinating --  but there
is just no way we're venturing into a feudally-based, hand-powered
society with an economy of koku rice
 measures and third-hand
Confucianism.

*These guys weren't ecological model-farmers: they didn't understand
the mechanics of rainfall, much less nitrogen fixation.  And while they
were "commanding and controlling" their underlings, they were so
deliberately ignorant of all developments elsewhere that a couple of
American steamboats were enough to traumatize them utterly.  What the
heck is "sustainable" about that?


Wrong on most counts, sorry.  There's a book you should read, by F.H. King,
titled Farmers of Forty Centuries,Or Permanent Agricultural Practices in
China, Korea, and Japan.
This was first published in 1911.  Dr. King was a professor at the
University
of Wisconsin (the current soil science building is named after him) and he
toured
the countries in question in 1904 to learn how they did their agriculture.
When
 he did
his research, Japan had three people per acre, or three times the density of
Holland, and
and they had twice the number of horses and cattle per acre than the US.

While they didn't have the Haber-Bosch nitrogen fixation process, they knew
as much about using
legumes in crop rotation as we do, along with manuring, sophisticated water
management, and quite
honestly, better waste management than we have now.  Their sanitation
workers bought the privilege of
emptying the urban privies, because they could sell "night soil" to the
farmers for a profit.  The
farmers composted human waste, and spread it on the fields (and apparently
made it safe, since
they seldom dealt with things like dysentery).  A Japanese official King
talked to thought
westerners were stupid to flush something so valuable down the drain.

Anyway, read up on Japan.  I don't lionize or even condone much of what the
Tokugawa did, but they,

along with the Chinese and Koreans, did a heck of a job managing their
fields.  I'll tell you in
advance that King's book is going to look familiar, because it's on the
shelves of a lot of organic
farmers.

As for Perry's steamships in 1854, remember that 50 years later, the
Japanese beat
the Russians using modern armaments. After a revolution.  That doesn't
suggest a sick
society to me.

One major mistake is to assume that expertise in military technology equates
with
expertise in agricultural technology.  The Japanese are a great counter-
example.
So are the Aztec and Inca, who fed more of their people than did the
Spaniards
who destroyed them.  As Charles Mann notes in 1491, there were more people
in
Tenochtitlan and Cuzco than there were in most European cities.  The Aztecs
were
stone age, and the Inca were bronze age, by their armaments.  By their ag
skills,

they were beyond the Europeans (who invented maize and potatoes, after all?)
Since the Inca homeland is also the homeland of the potato blight that
nailed Ireland,
I'd say they knew what they were doing.

As for the limits of imagination, I don't deny the importance of
imagination.
Far from it. Here I'm doing the boring scientific thing of laying out the
evidence
of what has worked in the past.

If anything, my fear is in part based on my imagination, because I can
pretty easily
imagine a sustainable society.  The fact that it's apparently so hard to
implement
a sustainable society suggests that the limiting factor isn't imagination,
it's getting
people to live within limits.

Hopefully I'm wrong.

Despite my pessimism, I'm enjoying reading this, and I find it quite
informative.  Keep it up!
  
## 114 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 09 09:01

    
A couple points for semi-anonymous Frank from your humble
immoderator...

1) You may have missed my "Jaws" analogies, but one point was that a
robust many-to-many information ecology can make a difference, and the
human race is rapidly evolving a communication infrastructure that
could be relevant, not just in response to great white sharks or
accelerating global warming, but also to an acknowledged need to live,
work, and act with sustainability as a goal Sustainability depends on
awareness, knowledge, analytics, and persistent social interaction, all
potentially well-supported within the evolving cypber/noosphere. I'm
therefore skeptical of arguments from histories of societies and
cultures that were not similarly wired. And I don't think I'm being
techno-utopian here. Persistent omnidirectional scale-free networks of
communication just inevitably make a difference, I think.

2) I'm also skeptical of history, period, because historical accounts
are riddled with misperceptions, half-truths, surreal abstractions, and
outright lies. "Those who ignore history are doomed to repeat it," but
we must take all history with a grain, perhaps a massive rock, of
salt. All history and all reporting, contemporary "news" too. The best
journalists (including Emily, Bruce, and hopefully me, when I'm wearing
that hat) have learned to pay clear and close attention to feedback,
and are always prepared to revise and update. It's harder to revise and
update history that's been passed through many perceptions over time,
as you get farther from the actual facts.

Recalling the Firesign Theatre: "Everything you know is wrong!"
  
## 115 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:07

    
*Frank, I'm actually rather keen on Tokugawa Japan and I
also read Diamond's book, so I don't believe we're disagreeing
on any facts here.  I just refuse to be scared by the idea
that the future of agriculture has to resemble the past of Tokugawa
peasants industriously shipping their nightsoil.  I don't care
how many organic groceries think this archaic activity is superb.
You simply haven't convinced me that this is the way
forward, and that every other mode of life has the skeleton
grin of starvation.  Sorry, I'm just not buying it.
Not because it's boringly scientific but because it's
absurd.
  
## 116 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:09

    
*Meanwhile, somewhere in the halls of Washington...

The legendary Silicon Valley venture capitalist made five
recommendations to Congress and President-elect Barack Obama to
jump-start a green-tech revolution and fight global warming:

Modernize the grid: As part of the economic stimulus package, Doerr
said Congress should invest in a more efficient electric grid that can
deliver solar and wind power to consumers across the country.

Put a price on carbon: A cap-and-trade system and a carbon tax that's
refunded to taxpayers could drive up the costs for coal plants and make
low-carbon sources, wind and solar, more competitive.

A national renewable energy standard: Doerr believes the federal
government should follow California and two dozen other states that
require utilities to generate more of their power from renewable
sources.

New incentives for utilities: California utilities will spend $3
billion on energy-efficiency measures over the next 18 months because
state rules give companies major incentives to conserve energy. New
federal rules could force other states to follow suit, he said.

More federal energy research: The federal government spends less than
$1 billion a year on renewable energy research. Doerr urged more
federal research and loan guarantees to help new technologies get off
the ground.

*Obviously I'm not perfectly contented with all of this -- as a snotty
granola-munching mandarin, I'm never gonna be perfectly contented with
anything, ever --  but we could do worse.
  
## 117 of 177: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:13

    
At what point did European countries learn about the use of
fertilizer? Apparently the Pilgrims needed to be shown how to put fish
in with the corn kernels, or was it just because they hadn't been
farmers before?
  
## 118 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:14

    
*Meanwhile, news just in from SF.CA's own RE/SEARCH Publications.
Vale has gotten Kunstler fever, and now plans a RE/SEARCH collapse
survival guide -- presumably something to do with the Bay Area's
time-honored "Survival Research Laboratories," eh?

*Boy, THAT cheery publication oughta be something to see.
I can't wait to page through it while sending my robot
chainsaw legions to destroy the world's last organic farmers.

*Vale is asking his readers for help!


"Still Alive and Kicking: Don't know about you, but, having been under
the spell of James Howard Kunstler and other Peak Oil prophets, we are
hunkering down in anticipation of the greatest economic catastrophe
ever seen in our lifetime. Would anyone be interested in a RE/SEARCH
SURVIVAL GUIDE? That's what we truly want to work on! Send us feedback,
just to prove you actually READ this newsletter! Send us your favorite
"future survivalism" links!"

*Yes, I actually read his newsletter and I can prove it:

WELCOME TO V. VALE's [Abbreviated] RE/SEARCH NEWSLETTER #79, January
2009
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
RE/SEARCH | 20 Romolo #B | San Francisco CA 94133 | 415.362.1465
www.researchpubs.com | http://www.myspace.com/researchpubs |
info@researchpubs.com
  
## 119 of 177: Cogito, Ergo Dubito (robertflink) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:19

    
>It's harder to revise and update history that's been passed through
many perceptions over time,as you get farther from the actual facts.<

Great immoderation!!

Will confidently filtering "history" through the hubris of the present
ever help us deal with the stormy present let alone the unknown
future?  

Skepticism suggests that we employ a least a little of that
old-fashioned virtue: prudence.
  
## 120 of 177: (jacob) Fri 9 Jan 09 10:57

    
Kunstler is a classic moralist millenarian.  Of course, the sins he
believes we are guilty of are aesthetic, but his eschatology is perfectly
parallel to that of premillenialist Christians.  He anticipates a
catastrophe brought on by our own wickedness, a sweeping-clean of the
masses of humanity, the destruction of all those cultural ills he decries,
and afterward, a pastoral Eden of small towns.  With very tasteful
architecture.  And no strip malls.

All good fun.  But I wouldn't start buying shares in Sears in anticipation
of a return to the late 19th century, myself.
  
## 121 of 177: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Fri 9 Jan 09 13:44

    
I fear though that Kunstler may be closer to the truth than most, not
because solutions to our problems aren't technically possible, but
because they will prove to be politically impossible.  Roughly half the
population has only a tenuous connection to reality, as do their
elected representatives.  You aren't going to get any effective
solutions from that crowd, and our population - and resource
consumption - is simply too vast to support us for long if rational
policies aren’t put in place essentially now.
 
  
## 122 of 177: (wiggly) Fri 9 Jan 09 15:41

    
bruces, the original Viridian Manifesto listed artificial food in the
"What We Want" category. What did you imagine artificial food to be
at that time - inkjet bivet steak and GMO pomme frites, Adria's latest
creation, or something else entirely? Did food science move in the
direction you had in mind?
  
## 123 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Fri 9 Jan 09 16:23

    
It's the P.C. color, but is soylent green artificial?  (Oops, now I
sound snotty ;=)
  
## 124 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 09 19:33

    
Keep your soylence, Scott. *8^)

Local food is a cause that's happening:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Local_food

>>>
Local food (also regional food or food patriotism) or the local food
movement is a "collaborative effort to build more locally based,
self-reliant food economies - one in which sustainable food production,
processing, distribution, and consumption is integrated to enhance the
economic, environmental and social health of a particular place" and
is considered to be a part of the broader sustainability movement. It
is part of the concept of local purchasing and local economies, a
preference to buy locally produced goods and services. Those who prefer
to eat locally grown/produced food sometimes call themselves
"localvores" or locavores.
<<<

So artificial food doesn't seem to be the "what we want" du jour - we
seem to want more local farmers' markets and a better sense how to live
on just those foods that don't travel. 
  
## 125 of 177: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Fri 9 Jan 09 20:39

    
I couldn't figure out why Kunstler was so fixated on the end of recorded
music and the resurgence in people sitting around singing together until I
learned that JHK was an unsuccessful musical theater performer.

Aspirational apocaphilia.

Local food has a little bit of a faddish quality, in that the carbon
benefits aren't always clear-cut (e.g., because of differing ranching
practices, lamb raised in New Zealand and shipped to the UK apparently has
a lower carbon footprint than lamb raised locally in the UK). Faux meat 
("cultured meat", vat-grown meat, meat-jet printers, etc.) could make a 
big difference to overall carbon footprints, but I suspect we'll be eating 
kangaroo burgers before we're eating Soylent Steak ("It's Peoplicious!").

Bruce, I haven't seen you do much about geoengineering. With the news 
today that a combined German/Indian operation is going to do a deep ocean 
iron feritilization experiment (in contravention of a voluntary 
moratorium), it just seems more and more likely that geo is going to 
happen whether we like it or not. Any thoughts on the subject?
  
## 126 of 177: (wiggly) Fri 9 Jan 09 23:54

    
This food miles thread is a bit off the mark, but it should be noted that
Lincoln University, the source of that much-mentioned comparison of the
carbon footprint of various NZ agricultural products to their UK
counterparts, is a NZ ag school. Their conclusions may be correct, but
they also have a clear incentive to reach those conclusions. Sheep ranchers
in other countries have already questioned some of their assumptions,
including their calculations for shelter (or lack thereof) costs in
NZ.
  
## 127 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 10 Jan 09 05:28

    
Did I suggest that global warming is pretty much accepted by everybody
by now? I should have excluded government leaders in my own home state
of Texas. From today's Austin American-Statesman:

>>>
The energy and environment issue is at the crux of the state's
industrial and demographic future. Home to manufacturing and oil
refining facilities up and down the Gulf Coast, Texas is the nation's
No. 1 carbon dioxide emitter. Meanwhile, with the state's population
growing by as much as 50 percent by 2030, utilities are proposing more
power plants, some of them cheap-to-produce coal plants.

Shaping policy under the dome, key lawmakers say they remain
unconvinced auto and manufacturing emissions of carbon dioxide
contribute to a changing climate.
<<<

The article goes on to say that "Gov. Rick Perry, Lt. Gov. David
Dewhurst and a host of House committee chairmen ... dismiss anxieties
about global warming and ... torpedoed most pieces of environmental
legislation in the last session. Along with industry groups, they say
any kind of federal caps on carbon dioxide emissions could derail the
state's economy and cost billions of dollars in compliance."

http://www.statesman.com/news/content/region/legislature/stories/01/10/0110warming.html
  
## 128 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Sat 10 Jan 09 06:02

    
From offsite reader Hudson Luce:

-------------------------------------------------------
In response to the thread, and specifically the posting below:
......................................................## 12 of 125: John Payne (satyr) Fri 2 Jan 09 09:47


"Short term, I think the economy will rebound.  Long term, we're in for
changes that won't be denied, and the longer we try to put them off the
harder they're going to hit us when they do arrive."
==================================
My reply comment, and question are as follows:

By "short term", I assume you mean within the next year or so, say two years
at the most. As of July 2008, the US national debt was set at $10.6
trillion. The "bailout" money spent by the Bush Administration, and the
current year's budget deficit will increase this number by about $3
trillion, up to a total of $13.6 trillion (give or take a few hundred
billion dollars) by the end of FY2008. President-elect Obama has stated that
he expects to run trillion-dollar deficits for years on end, deficits which
will be added to the national debt, so that by the end of FY2009, the total
is $14.6 trillion, FY2010, $15.6 trillion, and so on. A lot of people liike
to think that the national debt is "money we owe ourselves", but interest on
it still gets paid, and the underlying bonds still have to be sold. To
someone who wants to buy them. Of late, the Chinese are losing interest in
buying US debt. Credit default swaps on US treasury instruments are getting
to be more expensive. Pretty quickly we're going to get into a situation
where the Treasury is going to be forced to offer more interest at the
Treasury bond auctions or not enough bonds will be sold. There might be a
problem, here: if we get into a situation like what happened in 1980, where
interest on 3-month Treasury bills went up to 11.4% and that on 1-year bills
was 10.9%, and so on, then refinancing the national debt might prove to be
more than the US could afford, since the interest payments alone could end
up consuming all of the taxes collected, leaving none for Social Security,
Medicare/Medicaid, and the defense budget, all of which are paid out of the
general fund.

At that point, there are two alternatives. One of them is to default on a
part of the interest payments on the national debt, also known as "sovereign
default", which could possibly trigger a massive sell-off of US Treasury
obligations and a concomitant increase in interest rates to compensate for
the loss in value. This alternative is generally not desired, because it
would engender the absolute collapse of the US financial system. This means
that people's savings, pensions, CDs, IRAs, whatever, would be wiped out.
True, people would still own tangible goods, crops in the ground could still
be harvested, and so on, but there'd be no foreign exchange because there'd
be no way to pay for it. Oil deliveries would stop. There'd be chaos, beyond
James Kunstler's wildest dreams.

The US Government would most likely prefer to avoid this scenario, so they'd
probably choose another scenario, the one that Helicopter Ben is busily
bringing about, and that is to print money. Lots of it. Backed by the "full
faith and credit of the US Government". The idea is to create money out of
thin air to pay off debt, and that's what the Fed is beginning to do right
now. The plan is to increase the money supply by $3 trillion by monetizing
the debt, and then to further monetize additional trillions in deficits as
they are incurred. The real effect of this is to turn the US dollar into the
Zimbabwean dollar. Yesterday you could get 10 million ZWD for a dollar.
Today, it's more worthless. The national debt can get paid off quickly this
way, but there's the same trouble: the dollar ceases to be a meaningful unit
of exchange, just like in the Weimar Republic in 1923, where it was easier
to use currency for fuel than try to buy wood with it.

 There's an interesting article on this prospect in the Financial Times,
written by Willem Buiter, a professor at the London School of Economics and
a regular contributor to FT (http://blogs.ft.com/maverecon/2009/01/can-the-us-economy-afford-a-keynesian-stimulus/) In the article, he forecasts a
collapse in the value of the US dollar within the next 2 to 5 years.
Obviously, he's not counting on there being any sort of recovery.

My question is this: What happens to the projections for 2009 and the next
few years if these things occur, namely, if the US dollar ceases to become a
useful medium of exchange or store of value?
  
## 129 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Sat 10 Jan 09 10:04

    


>Aspirational apocaphilia.


Brilliant, Jamais!

Adbusters, of course, beat Re/Search to this special issue.  For a blast of
nostalgia, read Dawn Danby's post about it on Worldchanging from Oct.
2004:

"The issue alludes to S11.2, a single, catastrophic event that causes the
whole global machine to crash. The lights go out, the US government
relinquishes power, and the world's cities empty. Where the people go is
not clear. Those who felt this coming all along cleverly begin to plant
victory gardens on rural property and urban rooftops. The scenario is
implausible, but its device - an unspecific post-apocalypse, led by
anarchists turned back-to-the-landers, is in many ways deeply familiar.
Adbusters' tone has changed, and the writing is almost buoyant. In the
S11.2 world, the culture jammers have won. Somewhat fittingly, after years
of ballooning, the magazine has lost half its weight: the pages are thin,
like newsprint."

"...This young person's depopulated America reminds me of the
idealistic/myopic vision that some anarchists share with libertarians: both
worlds operate much better if you take the elderly, the very young, and the
sick out of the equation."

http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/001419.html

---

I've been looking around for biotech interventions to global warming.  Has
anything interesting come across your screen, Bruce?
  
## 130 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Sat 10 Jan 09 10:22

    

Last year's big biotech/climate change story was really another skirmish in
the existing mess of corporations patenting genes:

Corporations Grab Climate Genes
http://www.fpif.org/fpiftxt/5223
  
## 131 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 09 11:27

    
*A big day here in Torino: I got a washing machine.

*I now stand ready to console people insisting
that I check the production mileage in my clothing.

*Next, the artificial food issue.  Never mind
the hot-button of food -- let's talk artificial
fibers.  I happen to wear nylon, spandex, and
polyesters... How many among us are wearing organic fur
we hand-spun off our mohair goats?  Come on, there
must be at least a couple of us.

*I'm wearing my favorite Jhane Barnes sweater now,
which was digitally designed.  This garment couldn't be hand-loomed
short of a hundred man-years of peasant labor.  

*Rather than condemning those faceless peasants to decades
of righteous toil for my benefit, I think I'll just publicly
admit right now that Jhane Barnes is my favorite couturier.

*I know she's not in San Francisco any more --
she jetted off to the other coast and rebuilt
a dream home -- but Jhane, if you're listening,
let's talk.
  
## 132 of 177: Jamais Cascio (cascio) Sat 10 Jan 09 16:12

    
Em, Rob Carlson is the person you want to talk to regarding biotech
interventions and global warming. And thanks.
  
## 133 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 09 07:25

    
Bruce, I made my way over to Jhane Barnes' virtual shop, and checked
out the nifty lightweight sweaters, 64% Rayon/36% Nylon, $250. Sweaters
in my world can range from twenty to eighty bucks... $250 is downright
inaccessible for the average pilgrim shopping bargains at Macy's (or,
even more likely, shopping clothes at Target or Old Navy).

Retail had a crappy Christmas season, everyone was shopping for
bargains, and the ration of buying to looking was looow. The word on
the street is that many retail stores will fail, and those that barely
survive are making it by slashing prices to the bone. Will there still
be a market for $250 Jhane Barnes sweaters?

This may not seem relevant to the state of the world, exactly, but a
collapse of the retail sector could be a pretty significant economic
bomb, especially among so many others.
  
## 134 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 09 07:30

    
I've been looking around for biotech interventions to global warming. 
Has anything interesting come across your screen, Bruce?

*Well, I'm kinda liking Vinod Khosla's cellulosic ethanol scheme,
mostly because it's so light on chrome-plated scifi whizbang.

*Basically you cover vast hectares of marginal land with
cheap, tough, fast-growing weeds, crack the fiber and
turn it into booze. Then you burn the booze and let the
roots of the weeds store some carbon in the soil.

*Then when you drive your huge, ugly car around on
long, unnecessary commutes, your car, as a net benefit,
removes carbon-dioxide from the air.  Which would
mean that colossal traffic jams were sucking pollutants
out of the sky by the megaton.

*I like the green cognitive dissonance here.
  
  
## 135 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Sun 11 Jan 09 07:41

    


It's got a certain elegance.
  
## 136 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 09 07:42

    
Will there still be a market for $250 Jhane Barnes sweaters?

*Aw, it's just the rag trade.  Prices there are all for show;
those are catwalk prices.  

*I don't remember what price I paid for this Jhane Barnes
sweater I'm wearing right now.  Don't get me wrong:
that price was hefty.  Obviously a lot of guys who
used to be swanning around in Jhane's finest are
gonna feel the urge to kit-out in German military
surplus sweaters; there's tons of 'em, they keep
you warm and they're indestructible.

*But I don't agree with that approach.
My own feeling about it is that a Depression
is basically a culture-war.  When fat-headed
spendthrifts rule the roost, when everyone's
in rhinestone blingbling, THEN you should dress in
urban anarchist camou and matte black.

*But when your freakin' BANKER is dead broke
and selling apples and pencils from a cart, that's when
you should go out of your way to look like
Fred Astaire.  Dapper. Ritzy.  A candle in
the general darkness.

*My new year's couture resolution is to
try to remove some of the black from my wardrobe.
Black is just too archaically 80s-90s in these fraught times.
I can't possibly go so far as the Pantone color
choice for 2009, the unfortunate "mimosa yellow,"
but I'm thinking, well... some gray.

*I can't leave black entirely behind, but yeah,
I can go for gray.
  
## 137 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Sun 11 Jan 09 08:14

    
Way back in <97> (lrph) said:
> If this doesn't scare you, just think about it: starvation and 
> dictatorship seem to be the only proven ways to make people go 
> sustainable.
>
> I hope there's a third way...

There may be, through making it an easier choice, by letting machines do 
most of the hard, tedious work.  See http://cultibotics.blogspot.com/
  
## 138 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Sun 11 Jan 09 09:06

    
(Did I really say that? It doesn't sound like me.  Oh, it's not me.  It's me
posting the comments from Frank - our off-WELL participant.  Never mind.
Carry on)
  
## 139 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Sun 11 Jan 09 09:35

    
Sorry about the faulty attribution.

I might also mention that anyone looking to get involved in moving service
robots from the pages of science fiction into the real world would be well
advised to look through the projects hosted on http://sourceforge.net/ and
to pick up a copy of Make Magazine.  For existing agriculture-related
projects, the best site is probably
http://www.service-robots.org/applications/agriculture.htm
  
## 140 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Sun 11 Jan 09 09:53

    
<*My new year's couture resolution is to
try to remove some of the black from my wardrobe.
Black is just too archaically 80s-90s in these fraught times.
I can't possibly go so far as the Pantone color
choice for 2009, the unfortunate "mimosa yellow,"
but I'm thinking, well... some gray.>


Go green, Mr. Sterling, green. Haven't you been paying attention?
Dark, dark green if you want to look thinner.  Limey green when on a
factory tour of "Oliver Twist" capitalism. Combat green for the opening
of Dubya's Presidential Library (a multibillion dollar earmark where
there you will find a fine collection of easy-read manuals on torture,
but no books per se). Forest green if you want to feel reeeeeeelly
green.  Jhane Barnes green if your last advance was enough (we'll all
be green with envy). Does she digitally design a flesh-colored body
suit that changes shade with the wearer's mood?  That would be the
perfect green to wear when dining on soylent.    
  
## 141 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Sun 11 Jan 09 11:03

    
From offsite reader Hudson Luce <128>:
> By "short term", I assume you mean within the next year or so, say two 
> years at the most.

Well, if you're interpreting my use of "rebound" to mean getting back to
the same level (as measured by the stock market) where we were just over a
year ago, then possibly never, but if you're thinking in terms of getting
back to the level of last summer, then two or three years, but without the
sickening feeling that there's no bottom to it.  I think the trend will be
clearly upward by mid-summer, '09.  This is just hunchwork on my part.

> President-elect Obama has stated that he expects to run trillion-dollar 
> deficits for years on end, deficits which will be added to the national 
> debt, so that by the end of FY2009, the total is $14.6 trillion, FY2010, 
> $15.6 trillion, and so on.

Sounds like he's taking a page from Reagan, with the difference that Obama 
won't be just trying to jump-start the old economy, as it was, but to get 
on with the process of transforming the economy into one that's more in 
step with the times, which is to say fundamentally healthier.  Given that, 
deficit spending in the assurance that resulting growth will offset it in 
the long term is probably valid.

> There might be a problem, here: if we get into a situation like what 
> happened in 1980, where interest on 3-month Treasury bills went up to 
> 11.4% and that on 1-year bills was 10.9%, and so on

No doubt there'll be a lot of pressure on Obama to show that the downward
trend is at least reaching a plateau, if not reversing, sooner rather than
later.  We're in dire need of at least a modicum of faith to go with the 
hope.

> The plan is to increase the money supply by $3 trillion by monetizing
> the debt, and then to further monetize additional trillions in deficits 
> as they are incurred. The real effect of this is to turn the US dollar 
> into the Zimbabwean dollar.

If carried on without limit for a long time, yes, but I'm sure that's not
what they have in mind.  The Fed is a fundamentally conservative
institution, charged with maintaining the value of the currency.  If the
economy actually does grow, tracking closely on the heels of the increase
in the money supply, then there'll be little harm done, if any.

> Willem Buiter, a professor at the London School of Economics...
> Obviously, he's not counting on there being any sort of recovery.

That's not a very good bet.  Stimuluses work.  The question is whether the 
result is something that contributes to the long-term health of the 
economy or not.  We can't afford to blow this chance at transforming the 
U.S. economy into one that's more sustainable.  If we do, we'll be up 
against the wall again a decade from now, only next time it'll be worse.
More of the same old same old won't get us there.  Growth has got to be 
accompanied by change.

> My question is this: What happens to the projections for 2009 and the 
> next few years if these things occur, namely, if the US dollar ceases to 
> become a useful medium of exchange or store of value?

Can't happen so abruptly.  Carry on with 'monetizing' deficit spending 
without corresponding growth in the economy for ten years, then maybe.
  
## 142 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Sun 11 Jan 09 12:53

    


> *I can't leave black entirely behind, but yeah, I can go for gray.


Hear hear!  I sometimes venture off to run an errand in Manhattan not
wearing a stitch of black clothing...I started phasing it out during the
dot-bust.

The thing to do on expensive sweaters is stop buying cheap ones once you've
laid out for the fabulous one.  Eventually, assuming you take care of it
and your design eye was smart, it amortizes out to cost a lot less per wear
than the one you would have sold at a yard sale after a year or two.

Bargain hunting for the truly good stuff is a sport unto itself, of course,
which I enjoy.  But sometimes the truly sustainable decision lies in making
the big outlay up front, against incurring lower costs well into the
future.  If it works for solar power, it works for sweaters.
  
## 143 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 09 01:12

    
*I frankly don't care whether my solar power ever gets "amortized." 
And the same goes double for my sweaters.

*When I perish, I hope they don't chisel on my tombstone, "His
activities made sound economic sense."  I just frankly rebel at that
kind of niggling tyranny over my existence.  I don't care who scolds me
about it.  Since when am I supposed to mutilate myself over the
Protestant work ethic?  I'm not even a Protestant.

*And if it's about the environmental load of my sweaters, I've
got a brainstorm for you. My grandfather's got a much lighter
carbon-footprint for his sweaters than any of us here.
Why?  Because he'S DEAD.  

*They buried him under the Earth.  He's being
recycled.  The same fate awaits all of us.  So if I
like colorful sweaters, I'm gonna wear 'em NOW.

*I'm not squandering that much money. Even if I do squander it, as
long as I'm not mainlining heroin, whose business is it?  

*Is the Secretary of the Treasury making "sound economic sense?"  Does
the Congress soberly amortize all of its pork-barrels?  Are the
Communist Chinese the idols of intelligent long-term investment?  Do
the Swiss have clean hands as they stack their gold coins in some
fallout shelter?  Who's our moral idol of tidy thrift here?  They're
like Sisyphus heaving boulders through a glass house.

*And I'm supposed to worry if my &^$@#^& sweaters pay off?  If
Jhane Barnes shows up in this WELL conversation, I'll freakin' GIVE
the woman two hundred and fifty dollars.  I promise.  

*Jhane Barnes is a gifted, serious, contemporary, even avantgarde
designer.  I'm proud to share the world with her.  If Jhane's 
gonna stop her daily yoga routine and drop by to explicate
contemporary fabric design, throwing some bucks out the window to hear
her log in would be a small price to pay.  
  
## 144 of 177: Teneo, Ergo Spero (robertflink) Mon 12 Jan 09 06:55

    
Great rant, Bruce.
  
## 145 of 177: John Payne (satyr) Mon 12 Jan 09 07:04

    
> niggling tyranny

I'll be turning that one over in my mind for quite a while.
  
## 146 of 177: I'm Really Jhane Barnes (s-macfarlane) Mon 12 Jan 09 09:04

    
It really IS green this year, dahling Bruce! 
  
## 147 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 09 11:35

    
Nobody I can see, looking back through the posts here, was scolding
you or casting slime at your personal choice of threads or questioning
your economic sense... my own question was whether Jhane Barnes et al
can sustain at the high end of retail fashion. We could ask the same
question of a Neiman Marcus or Ann Taylor, even Whole Foods Market,
food not fashion. 

(My fashion consultant is telling me Neiman Marcus will just fine
because they're so well-established, and maybe the same's true of Jhane
Barnes and others like her.)

Meanwhile that faint creaky distant rumble you're hearing is
government printing presses firing up to print more dollars... 
  
## 148 of 177: Linda Castellani (castle) Mon 12 Jan 09 19:29

    
In Chapter Three of this episode of Nova, called "Hunting the Hidden
Dimension, Jhane Barnes discovers she's using The Mandelbrot Set for
fabric design:

http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/fractals/program.html
  
## 149 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 09 21:40

    
Jhane Barnes is God!
http://www.jhanebarnesisgod.com/

Another potential trend: Kevin Kelly has been quantifying himself:
http://www.kk.org/quantifiedself/2008/12/quantifying-myself.php

It's a cyborganic approach to health and wellness: track sleep,
weight, mood, exercise, sex, etc. Kevin's also working on the
CureTogether project - "open source health research." (Note also the
Health Commons project -
http://sciencecommons.org/projects/healthcommons/ - so much medical
research is proprietary, locked away.)

I'm part of e-patients (http://e-patients.net/), which was formed by
the late Tom Ferguson, MD, with a handful of colleagues, mostly
physicians, focusing on technology and patient empowerment. Many
patients learn more about their conditions than the physicians who are
treating them. They hang out online, swap stories, build knowledge,
which is potentially valuable. Many physicians are catching on, opening
to participatory medicine - learning from their patients.
  
## 150 of 177: Painted Paisley (s-macfarlane) Mon 12 Jan 09 22:05

    
If Jhane Barnes is God, then why did she ruin the paisley print, and,
with this design, leach all the vitality from the Sixties? No Gaian
Goddess would resort to such miss-appropriation.



http://www.jhanebarnes.com/online-item/cPath=4&products_id=979
  
## 151 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 09 22:36

    
God works in mysterious ways.
  
## 152 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 09 00:56

    
*If it comes to that, Jhane and the Japanese husband can come sleep on
my floor.  As Confucius say, the righteous will never lack for
neighbors.

*Meanwhile, on the clean-tech front... Okay, I know that this is an
important meeting.  Also, these are important people doing some of the
direly necessary green-industrial heavy-lifting.  If I wanted to be a
serious journalist or activist-player in this world, I would go hang
out at this thing.  I would interview them.  I would publicize them.  I
would help them network.

*I don't want to do it.  I don't want to talk to these people.  I know
somebody should, but my heart's not in it.  Okay, maybe Janine Benyus,
the one among the crowd whose efforts would most interest a science
fiction writer.  Other than that, I just can't go there; I'm too much
the technosocial butterfly.  I don't have what it takes to do a good
job of it, and life is too short to go around reluctantly performing
crap work.

*Maybe someone within earshot of this will go do that.  It needs
doing.

CLEAN EDGE ALERT
Events and Announcements for the Clean-Tech Community
(((Did you ever notice how every clique in the world
has become a "community"?  Somewhere there must be
a "Massive Investor-Defrauding Ponzi Scheme Community.")))


Register Now for the 5th Annual Clean-Tech Investor Summit
Only 120 Spots Remaining 


Worldwatch President Christopher Flavin latest luminary to confirm
attendance at the premier clean-tech event of the year!  (((I love the
word "luminary."  There ought to be a special dress code for
luminaries.  Perhps it involves fractal paisleys.)))


Coming on the heels of President-Elect Barack Obama's inauguration
ceremony and the largest global financial crisis seen in decades, this
year's Summit will provide a place for the leaders of clean-technology
investing and deployment to discuss new strategies as well as emerging
industries and cutting-edge ideas. 

Register Now And Save $400

There are only 120 spots left. Register now to save $400 by using the
Clean Edge code "CED400" when registering online or by phone. Be sure
to save your space today for the 5th Annual Clean-Tech Investor Summit
in Palm Springs, scheduled for January 21-22, 2009.  (((Lotta windmills
near Palm Springs.)))



Register online or contact IBF (Cathy Fenn) at (516) 765-9005, Ext.
210 or e-mail: cathy@ibfconferences.com. 

Confirmed speakers and panelists include:
Britta Gross, Manager, Hydrogen & Electrical Infrastructure, GM
(((General Motors Hydrogen Bailout)))
Christopher Flavin, President of Worldwatch Institute
(((They've watched it decline for decades)))
Dana Flanders, President, Chevron Technology Ventures
(((ate the little players ten years ago)))
Janine Benyus, author of Biomimicry and Cofounder of the Biomimicry
Guild, LLC  (((a goddess)))
Kevin Walsh, Managing Director Renewable Energy, GE Energy Financial
Services  (((General Electric founded by Thomas Edison personally)))
Larry O'Donnell, President and COO, Waste Management
(((someone's gotta clean the sky)))
Marc Verbruggen, CEO, NatureWorks  (((Nice company name)))
Peter Darbee, CEO and President, PG&E
(((We shut down switches, California governors fall like ninepins)))
Peter Gleick, President and Cofounder, Pacific Institute
Reyad Fezzani, CEO, BP Global Wind & Solar
T. Boone Pickens, Founder and Chairman of BP Capital Management
(((clouds of menacing dry ice fly from his cowboy boots)))
Attention Venture-Backed Clean-Tech Startups!

Venture-backed clean-tech companies click here for the opportunity to
showcase your products/services to potential investors, partners and
customers at The Clean-Tech Investor Summit. 

The Clean-Tech Investor Summit, co-produced by International Business
Forum and Clean Edge, and chaired by Technology Partners' Ira
Ehrenpreis, is the premier clean-tech investment and innovation event.

 Held each winter in Palm Springs, CA, the event brings together
leading investors, Fortune 500 executives, entrepreneurs, and relevant
service providers for two days of high-level presentations,
conversations, and networking. The 5th Annual Clean-Tech Investor
Summit is scheduled for January 21-22, 2009. For more information,
visit www.cleantechsummit.com. 

This year's sponsors include: Deloitte, Morrison Foerster, Orrick,
Stanford Group, Hobbs & Towne, Jefferies, Accsys Technologies, Comerica
Bank, Cooley Godward Kronish LLP, Italian Trade Commission,  (((Way to
go Italia))) Mintz Levin, Page One, Sonnenschein Venture Technology
Group, American Council on Renewable Energy; National Renewable Energy
Laboratory; and UK Trade & Investment. 

Join the Clean-Tech Investor Summit LinkedIn Group. 

We look forward to seeing you there!

The Clean Edge Team
  
## 153 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 09 00:59

    
*If actual industry-booster work is too much for your frail
countercultural bones, maybe you can scribble a little.


Wanna Write for GreenBiz.com?

GreenBiz.com is looking for guest and regular columnists and feature
writers. We're seeking contributions from business leaders as well as
the journalists who write about them. If you're interested, send a
brief query to managing editor Matthew Wheeland, at
editor@greenbiz.com.

Read our editorial guidelines.  (((That would be a good idea just on
general principles.)))
  
## 154 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 09 01:16

    
*Meanwhile, on the dietary front, world peace breaks out because
Americans are too fat to get off the couch and fight.

http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/n/a/2009/01/12/national/a040610S50.DTL

(...) 

Maj. Gen. Thomas Bostick, head of the Army Recruiting Command, said he
wants to see a formal diet and fitness regimen running alongside a new
school at Fort Jackson that helps aspiring troops earn their GEDs.

Bostick told The Associated Press that obesity looms as "a bigger
challenge for us in the years ahead" than any other problem that keeps
young people from entering the military, including lack of a GED or
high school diploma, misconduct or criminal behavior and other health
issues such as eye or ear problems.

According to Defense Department figures provided to the AP, over the
past four years 47,447 potential recruits flunked induction physicals
at the nation's 35 Military Entrance Processing Stations because they
were overweight. (...)

Obesity afflicts recruits for other physically demanding jobs,
including firefighters. Deputy Chief Ed Nied, chair of the safety,
health and survival section of the International Association of Fire
Chiefs, said fire departments are also making a "major push" to
encourage better fitness among young people who want to join.

"We draw from the same exact population that they (the military) draw
from," Nied said from his Tucson, Ariz., headquarters. "This comes from
a lack of physical education in the high schools." (..)

*No it doesn't.  It's not just high school kids who are fat.
Forty percent of the whole population is visibly afflicted.

*When I return from Europe to the USA these days, I can see
that fat Americans are not simply "fat," they look goiterous
somehow, obscurely malnourished.  The American media has been
crammed with fat-cures, exercise programs, fad diets,
for decades now. It's not a new problem.  

*American people in health-food stores are fat.   Maybe a little
less fat, but not a whole lot.  You look at the obesity
ratings and they track pretty well with Red States -- but
it can't be political convictions making Americans fat.
In America the *poor people* are fat.

*I have to suspect there's an undiagnosed determinant here.
Something very heavily  present in the American diet
that other national regions don't have.  I'm not
a nutritionist -- and I don't think American nutritionists
know their jobs, or their clientele would not be
dropping in droves -- but I suspect it must be
some omnipresent industrially food substance.

*My guess would be corn-syrups.

*I'm wondering if the roots of this obesity epidemic
started with the anti-Castro sugar embargoes.
Americans seem to have corn-sweeteners in everything.
Other countries didn't do that -- they rot their
teeth with real sugars.  

*I know this sounds like off-the-wall food paranoia,
but when you're out of the US and you return to it,
the physical state of the population is  shocking.
Especially -- and I have to say this --the recruits
for the Transportation Safety Agency.  Obviously
this is one American militia which has no problem
recruiting people who can barely heave out of their
chairs.  

*When you get off a European plane and you confront
these bloated characters prying through your luggage,
it's Kafka-esque.  It's like 1970s bande-dessinee grotesquerie
from back issues of METAL HURLANT.
  
## 155 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 13 Jan 09 01:38

    <scribbled>
  
## 156 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Tue 13 Jan 09 01:39

    
<a special dress code for luminaries.  Perhps it involves fractal
paisleys>

Like restoring a fixer-upper with good bones, countercultural kudos
for the post (#152), Mr. Sterling.  Even John D. Rockefeller did great
work with his foundation, (((years after his frail, robber baron body
was buried))).

And if Goddess Jhane's fractal paisleys were luminous, they would be 
outrageously hip, as hippie as the Dead's upcoming spring run that's
not playing anywhere near Italy, but is not much less expensive to
attend than those digitally-designed sweaters you do such an outta
sight job of amortizing.  
  
## 157 of 177: Lisa Harris (lrph) Tue 13 Jan 09 04:25

    
From Thomas Sepe

I would say that what is needed is leadership - social skills on the ground,
in the flesh, in our neighborhoods, to organize people to work together. I
think there is a failure of relying too heavily on technology to solve our
problems, whether it is fuel cells or social networking sites.

Television, computers, all of these things are de-socializing us...
expensive technologies take energy and resources and complicated sometimes
toxic materials and processes to manufacture....

Don't get me wrong, I love my laptop... but I don't even know my neighbor's
names.... and I can guess that is true for a lot of renters in cities and
suburbs all over the U.S..... we have virtual communities... but our actual
communities what about that?

Tom Sepe
thomas@tomsepe.com
Oakland, Ca
  
## 158 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 13 Jan 09 07:44

    
From Colin Ashe, via Twitter:

Which vulnerable & venerable institutions *won't* collapse in 2009?
What will thrive, Cassandras be damned?
  
## 159 of 177: all rush the king... (uburex) Tue 13 Jan 09 08:45

    
Question(s) for bruces and anyone else -- 

Any big breakthroughs on the way in personal fabrication technology? 
Will we reach a point soon (5-10 years?) where it might be feasible to
set up community fabrication workshops?  Or are we stuck with a
situation where, as bslesins put it in post #35, "making high-margin
fashionable stuff (including media and software) becomes increasingly
do-it-yourself but the boring stuff like basic supplies and
infrastructure get manufactured cheaply by international companies at
scale" for the foreseeable future?  

I'm a MAKE dilettante, and the idea of personal fabrication tech is
interesting to me...but intuitively, a world where everyone has their
own "personal fab inkjet" doesn't seem much more sustainable than what
we have now.  I could see a more community-oriented approach yielding
more sustainable results.  

I'm prepared to admit that this might just be a failure of my own
imagination, however.  Hence the questions.   

   
  
## 160 of 177: Cogito, Ergo Credo (robertflink) Tue 13 Jan 09 20:57

    
The wonders of the present could well be infrastructures (aka "boring
stuff") of the future.    Of course, infrastructure requires some
attention to be reliable as we have recently learned here in
Minneapolis.  

We can't expect new generations to be thrilled by the same
developments as those in the past.  In fact, the more successful and
reliable a technology is, the more we "rely" on it, relegating it to
infrastructure.  

Little honor and recognition accrue to those who provide
infrastructure and the young pick up on that fact very quickly. 
  
## 161 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 09 02:54

    
"Television, computers, all of these things are de-socializing us...
expensive technologies take energy and resources and complicated
sometimes toxic materials and processes to manufacture...."

*Well, the net and cellphones definitely are de-socializing us --
in the sense that former social structures are visibly dissolving.
Last night we had dinner for guests and we brought out
some fine silverware from the 1930s.  It was amazing how
archaic it looked and felt compared to our mismatched plates,
re-used jelly-glasses, constantly bleeping cellphones,
a digital flatscreen at our elbows, and the other
globalized bric-a-brac of our multinational existence.

*It's beautiful social technology, silverware.  Henry
Petroski wrote some very nice design-studies things
about silverware.  Silverware is pretty. 
To eat with tools almost as heavy as lead makes
you very conscious of proper table-manners.  We have
almost none.  Except that we are kind to our friends.
Everyone was comfortable; we are how we are.
The silverware didn't feel much like sociality
any more; it was a party trick, conversation pieces.

*Being de-socialized doesn't mean falling into an
asocial abyss.  The 1930s were horrible times.  If you try to
return to the sociality of the 1930s you are
heading straight for what they used to call 
"the Dark Valley."

*I don't have 1930s catered dinner parties, but I do have
stuff like this WELL conversation.
  
## 162 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 09 03:02

    
Question(s) for bruces and anyone else -- 

Any big breakthroughs on the way in personal fabrication technology?

*I recommend a look at www.fabbaloo.com for 
some remarkable coverage of this very intriguing topic.
 
Will we reach a point soon (5-10 years?) where it might be feasible to
set up community fabrication workshops? 

*Yes.

 Or are we stuck with a
situation where, as bslesins put it in post #35, "making high-margin
fashionable stuff (including media and software) becomes increasingly
do-it-yourself but the boring stuff like basic supplies and
infrastructure get manufactured cheaply by international companies at
scale" for the foreseeable future?  

*All of the above.  If you've got the gumption to put
together a fabbing hacker-space, you're kinda by
definition not "stuck."  Besides, there's a very
loose boundary between high-end fashionable stuff
and boring everyday stuff.  Cellphones were
for rich jetsetters once and now they're boring
everydayness.

*Serious hobbies tend to bore other people;
otherwise theyre not personally fulfilling activities
but a form of public entertainment.

I'm a MAKE dilettante, and the idea of personal fabrication tech is
interesting to me...but intuitively, a world where everyone has their
own "personal fab inkjet" doesn't seem much more sustainable than what
we have now.  I could see a more community-oriented approach yielding
more sustainable results.  

*I hate to plug my own work here, but you need a look
at my book SHAPING THINGS, especially the description
of what it might be like to be a "wrangler" of "spimes."

I'm prepared to admit that this might just be a failure of my own
imagination, however. 

*There's a lot of imagination in the lazyweb.  
  
## 163 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 09 03:05

    
*We're gonna have to wind this up soon. Jhane might
yet sneak in under the wire, but...

*Okay, a word to the wise here.  Don't like fractal
paisleys?  "5.11 Tactical."  Known to Merlin Mann
as "Internet pants."  The shirts are even better.
I wear Jhane Barnes when I'm acting luminous, but
I live in 5.11 Tactical shirts.

*I'm looking for the chic European equivalent of
these garments.  Haven't found any just yet.  

*But I'm patient.
  
## 164 of 177: all rush the king... (uburex) Wed 14 Jan 09 05:25

    
bruces, thanks for the response.  fabbaloo does look like an
interesting read, and I'm intrigued by the description of "Shaping
Things" on Amazon.
  
## 165 of 177: all rush the king... (uburex) Wed 14 Jan 09 05:46

    
robertflink -- 

You wrote :"The wonders of the present could well be infrastructures
(aka "boring stuff") of the future.  Of course, infrastructure requires
some attention to be reliable as we have recently learned here in
Minneapolis."

That's quite insightful.  When I started college, we had a T1
connection in the computer labs, but the dorms were just beginning to
be wired for access to that network.  Instead, we used a sort of
simulated modem pool through the digital phone system (ah, fond
memories of using lynx to do online research when I couldn't be
bothered to walk to the computer labs!), or, if you knew what you were
doing, you could connect to the main network through a PPP connection,
but it was definitely in "beta" when I was there, and very slow.  Any
one of those connection methods, however, compared to BBSes, AOL, and
Compuserve (all I knew about online communication pre-college), was a
huge improvement!  By the time I moved off campus, all the dorms were
wired for ethernet, and we were lucky enough to be in one of the first
neighborhoods where broadband-over-cable was being tested...

Now, I don't know what I'd do without some form of high speed internet
connection.

Of course, I think you're talking more about conventional physical
infrastructure, but the same principles apply, I think.  Someone has to
lay the wires to connect homes to the net and maintain those
connections; someone has to keep the bridges in repair to make sure
they don't collapse.  Which, I think, presents an interesting point:
creating the infrastructure requires a separate skill set than
installing it, which requires a separate (maybe?) skill set than
maintaining it.  I can change a light bulb, but installing a new light
socket is a bit beyond me.  I could learn, probably, but there's
someone out there who already knows, can do it quicker and more
cheaply, and has less of a chance of electrocuting himself.  All of
which just feeds back into the need for community...

Sorry for the rambling.  Haven't finished my coffee yet.
  
## 166 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Wed 14 Jan 09 08:50

    
Thanks, Bruce, for taking the challenge to be constructive.  From all
of us old Well counterculturalists, here's a fine hat––a Merlin Mann
ether-gift––for you to wear with your Jhane fractal lumi-threads:


http://www.43folders.com/topics/monthly-pimp


Seriously, have a great '09!!
  
## 167 of 177: pardon my amygdala (murffy) Wed 14 Jan 09 09:13

    
One last question: How many bruces does it take to change a lightbulb?
  
## 168 of 177: Every Acid Dealer Gets Busted Eventually (rik) Wed 14 Jan 09 09:47

    
That's easy.   bruces has gone over to LEDs.
  
## 169 of 177: (jacob) Wed 14 Jan 09 11:58

    
The milling and deposition and laser-hardened-goo machines are very clever
and very cool.  but they can't make anything that you couldn't make in 1875
given a room full of machine tools and a small casting works.  Putting that
capability in your garage is a big step forward but it's maybe 0.01% of the
way towards a universal object-building machine.  I doubt I could find a
single object in this entire office which could be made only from parts
made in such a machine, and that's assuming that I'll do the assembly work
by hand.

That is not to detract from them.  I'd love one myself.  But we're at least
as far from a small-scale self-replication-capable assembly machine as from
human-level artificial intelligence.
  
## 170 of 177: Scott MacFarlane (s-macfarlane) Wed 14 Jan 09 13:35

    
The big rap on ethanol is how it drives the cost of food up.  The big
rap on American's these days is the epidemic of obesity. 
And...yes...corn syrup is the number one culprit.  SO, to have more
fuel to burn and burn more calories at the same time––i.e., help solve
the energy crisis and generate a quantum improvement in the physical
health of the population, at the same time, all we need to do is...

(((have the USDA ban high fructose corn syrup in all domestically
consumed foods and drinks)))
  
## 171 of 177: Linda Castellani (castle) Wed 14 Jan 09 14:58

    

>but they can't make anything that you couldn't make in 1875
 given a room full of machine tools and a small casting works. 

Jacob, this statement reminds me of the cartoon showing the scientists and 
the flow chart with the spot marked "And then a miracle occurs."  The 
whole point is that room full of tools.  When I went to see the Leonardo:  
500 years in the future exhibit when it was in Florence, the thing that 
stood out, in my view, was that not only did he invent things (some of 
which were actually made during his lifetime) he also had to invent the 
technology to make them, like the casting works that he had to design to 
build the Sforza horse.  It's the tools where the miracle occurs.  What 
you make with them is the sub-miracles.

On a slightly different note:  here's an example of an early community 
fabrication workshop:  http://www.bicyclekitchen.com/
  
## 172 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 14 Jan 09 16:20

    
Our hosts haven't mentioned it, but today a new Inkwell conversation
is starting and our formal commitment to carry this one forward ends.
Nobody's dousing the lights or locking the door, though... so carry on
if you'd like.

Here's the link for 5.11 Tactical: http://www.511tactical.com/

I can imagine a world where everything's DIY. That's where we came
from, after all. Economies may crumble but people carry on... life
persists. I was watching a bit of the Golden Globes and thinking how
massive an enterprise filmmaking has become, and how expensive... and
they're still churning them out, and crowds of filmgoers are still
showing up, enough to drive ongoing production. We haven't abandoned
the theatre experience completely in favor of our various devices,
however sophisticated the display and sound. The experience of sitting
in a crowded theatre with others sharing an experience is still
compelling. And elsewhere, I see more people aggregating in more
places, coordinating those physical experience through virtual
channels. So as Bruce says, we're no way asocial, but sociality has
been redefined and rechanneled, those energies are pouring into new
infrastructures for experience.

Derek Woodgate and I have created a think tank, called Plutopia, that
produces events instead of white papers. Our next will be at SXSW
Interactive, March 16. It's the kind of event I think we'll see more
of... there'll be bands and DJs, and many convergent art installations,
and speakers (including hopefully Bruce), and all kinds of
interestingly weird, forward-looking experimental stuff. Robots,
makers, etc. We might throw up some screens and do something with film
or high res video. People just flock to events, and the event itself is
an art form. (This isn't completely new... we learned a lot from Mark
Petrakis, aka Spoonman, and his Anon Salons... actually the "Spoonfest
Betatest" that I attended in 1993, which was a bunch of Bay Area geeks
doing cyberactive vaudeville.) And it's social, people meet at events
and hang out. Not long ago I watched an ad hoc intentional community
form in front of the Dirty Dozen Brass Band at Antone's in Austin...
for a couple of hours a bunch of people who were unlikely to see each
other again fell in love ... with the band and with each other... and I
think this is not uncommon.

When you jack into the noosphere, I guess you don't have to be
explicitly social in some defined way. A fish doesn't need a bottle of
Perrier.
  
## 173 of 177: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 15 Jan 09 00:17

    
Well, as Huey Long used to say during the last Depression, "Every man
a fish with a bottle of Perrier."

I see that both my banks are crashing today, because they've
lost all confidence in the loans they gave me.  Gosh, if I'd
known it was that easy to smash capitalism, I probably
woulda done it when I was a college student.


I live pretty modestly here in Turin, but compared to
Friedrich Nietzsche (he lived in my neighborhood) I have
every conceivable advantage.  I'm better fed, I'm better
educated, I have my health and even the critics are kinder.
So I guess that 2009 is the year when I knuckle down and
whip out a text to top THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.  Like
reformatting industrial civilization, that oughta be
easy.  And fun.

So long till next time.  Be luminous!
  
## 174 of 177: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 15 Jan 09 05:43

    
Thanks to all who dropped by, vocal or lurking. See you all next
year...!
  
## 175 of 177: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Thu 15 Jan 09 14:41

    


Nau might be the line that edges towards a chic version of 511 Tactical.  I
bought several items during the big fire sale, when it looked like Nau was
going under during the spring.  I would have really regretted paying full
price for a couple things -- the "casual" pullover cotton blouse, say --
but the technical gear is almost miraculous.  Crafty understated zippered
pockets, wide range of movement in the sleeves and shoulders, beautifully
cut and sewn, and the fabrics feel and look durable without saying "I'm a
nature freak."  And no logos ineradicably cut and sewn into or printed on
the garments.

And it's all supposedly extremely eco-virtuous material, to boot, but I
really have nothing to compare that claim to.

Thanks for hosting a great, thought-provoking conversation, jon and bruce!
  
## 176 of 177: Eric Gower (gower) Thu 15 Jan 09 16:48

    
Riveting as always, thank you bruces!
  
## 177 of 177: Linda Castellani (castle) Thu 15 Jan 09 19:01

    

Thanks, Bruce!  Have a wonderful 2009.
  

