inkwell.vue.234 : Bruce Sterling: State of the World 2005
## 0 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 1 Jan 05 07:19

    
Happy 2005, and welcome to our annual "state of the world" discussion with Bruce
Sterling. 2004 was twisted, so we should have a lot to talk about. First,
(probably overlong) bios for Bruce and discussion leader Jon L. The Bruce bio was
borrowed from The Bruce Sterling Online Index
(http://www.chriswaltrip.com/sterling/), with thanks to Chris Waltrip for all the
goodies there, including Cheap Truth, the Catscan columns, and the complete
Hacker Crackdown.

Bruce Sterling was born in Brownsville, Texas on April 14th, 1954. When he was
six months old, his parents moved to Austin where his father received a degree in
mechanical engineering from the University of Texas. After his father's
graduation the family moved to Galveston, where Bruce spent his formative years.  
He began writing at the age of twelve in what he would later describe as "a frank
bid for attention". When he was fifteen, his family moved to India, where his
father worked on a fertilizer plant project. He spent two and a half years
traveling extensively overseas, and then returned to Austin to attend classes at
the University of Texas. There Bruce became involved with a group of other
science fiction fans and writers who called themselves the Turkey City Writer's
Workshop, and with their encouragement began writing science fiction more
seriously. In 1976, he graduated with a degree in journalism and sold his first
science fiction story, Man-Made Self. A year later, Harlan Ellison published his
first novel, Involution Ocean, as part of his Discovery Series.

In 1980, Sterling published The Artificial Kid. For the next several years, he
wrote and sold a number of short stories set in what would eventually be called
the "Shaper-Mechanist universe". In 1985, he published a full-length novel in
this setting, called Schismatrix. At the same time, he began writing and editing
a photocopied "zine" called Cheap Truth in which he (under the pseudonym Vincent
Omniveritas) and a number of collaborators mocked the science fiction
establishment and called for a new, more vibrant, and more culturally relevant
approach to the genre. This viewpoint and the fiction associated with it
eventually became known as "cyberpunk". Along with William Gibson, John Shirley,
and Rudy Rucker, Sterling became one of the most prominent voices of this growing
movement. His eloquence, intensity, and gift for rhetoric combined to make him
such a powerful presence on science fiction convention panels that some people
referred to him as "Chairman Bruce". In 1986, he edited an anthology of cyberpunk
science fiction, Mirrorshades, which is considered to be one of the most
important documents of the genre. By 1988, the "cyberpunk" movement had run its
course, and Sterling began to move beyond it with his aggressively down-to-earth
science fiction novel Islands in the Net and a diverse short story collection,
Crystal Express, in 1989. He then collaborated with William Gibson on a
"steampunk" novel, The Difference Engine, which was published in 1990.

Also in 1990, the U.S. Secret Service raided the offices of Steve Jackson Games 
in Austin, Texas as part of a nationwide "hacker crackdown". Sterling was so 
alarmed by these events that he chronicled them in his first non-fiction novel, 
The Hacker Crackdown, published in 1992. After publishing the book in a 
conventional format, Sterling released the work in free electronic form as part 
of his bid to support a new communications medium known as the Internet. The 
electronic version of the book was widely disseminated, and can today be found on 
hundreds of websites around the world. He also gave the book away on disk at 
speaking engagements, to the considerable horror of his paper publishers. 
Following the publication of The Hacker Crackdown, Sterling began to write more 
journalism and non-fiction work, as well as embark upon a notable second career 
as a much sought-after public speaker. He continued to write science fiction, and 
in 1994 he published his dark tale of a global-warming future, Heavy Weather.

In 1995, Sterling gave a series of speeches explaining his interest in the life 
and death of new types of media. This led to the development of The Dead Media 
Project, an Internet mailing list and discussion group through which Sterling and 
a number of collaborators catalogued "dead" media of the past and present. 
Sterling's original aim was to organize a research project that would culminate 
in a book on dead media written collaboratively by the members of the mailing 
list. However the project eventually sputtered out and no book has yet been 
published.

In 1996, Sterling published Holy Fire, and some of his research for this novel 
led him to a new interest in design, especially industrial design. This interest 
and a growing concern about global climate change moved him to launch the 
Viridian Design movement. The movement was developed in a series of speeches 
given by Sterling in 1998 and 1999, and officially declared by a manifesto of 
January 3rd, 2000. The goal of the movement is to advance environmental awareness 
through revolutionary art and design, or as phrased on the Viridians' official 
website, to "create irrestible demand for a global atmosphere upgrade." Like the 
Dead Media Project, the movement is organized mostly by Sterling through an 
Internet mailing list. Unlike the Dead Media Project, the Viridian Design 
movement has produced considerably more "real world" products, which include two 
magazines, graphics and fonts, a website, a weblog, and a number of design 
projects. The Viridian Design movement continues to thrive to this day.

In 1998, Sterling published Distraction, a novel about politics and 
bioengineering. This was followed by a short story collection, A Good 
Old-Fashioned Future, in 1999. In 2000, he published Zeitgeist, a postmodern 
fantasy set at the turn of the millenium. His most recent work, Tomorrow Now: 
Envisioning the Next 50 Years, is a nonfiction work of futurist speculation.

Sterling continues to produce a steady output of novels, short stories, 
journalism, media appearances, speeches, weblog posts and email screeds.

***

Jon Lebkowsky is CEO of Polycot, an innovative team of Internet technology 
experts with broad experience creating and managing information systems for 
businesses and nonprofit organizations. An authority on computer-mediated 
communications, virtual communities, and online social networks, he has worked as 
project manager, systems analyst, technology director, and online community 
developer.

He was cofounder and CEO of one of the first virtual corporations, FringeWare, 
Inc. He is currently President of EFF-Austin, President of the Austin Free-Net 
Board of Directors, a cofounder of the Open Source Business Alliance, the Austin 
Wireless City Project, and the national Social Software Alliance, and advisor for 
the annual South by Southwest Interactive conference. He serves on the Advisory 
Board for the University of Texas Science, Technology, and Society Program. A 
longtime Internet activist, he is co-editing a book on technology, democracy, and 
advocacy, and served on the organizing committee for O'Reilly's Digital Democracy 
Teach-In (February 9, 2004). He recently completed a year-long engagement with 
IC² Institute at the University of Texas, where he managed Wireless Future, a 
project that produced a major economic development report as well as a national 
wireless track within South by Southwest Interactive. He contributes to weblogs 
at weblogsky.com, worldchanging.com, and smartmobs.com.

He has written about technology for publications such as Mondo 2000, 21C, Whole 
Earth Review, Fringe Ware Review, Wired Magazine, 21C, and the Austin Chronicle.
  
## 1 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 1 Jan 05 07:29

    
Ice caps are melting, the US was slammed by a succession of major hurricanes this 
year, the U.S. is struggling with a painful war in Iraq... where do we start? And 
how did you get a gig teaching industrial design?
  
## 2 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 2 Jan 05 07:17

    
Well, for two years I've been trying to write a science fiction novel
about "ubiquitous computation."  However, I'm now so close to
my material that, when I went to lecture about it, I got asked
to join the faculty of a design school.

It's not like I get tenure, mind you.  I'm merely guest-artist
for a year, or, as they like to put it at my new alma mater,
Art Center College of Design, I'm "Provocateur-in-Residence."
But I get a salary, and, more to the point, I get to play
in the prototype lab.  

I could have said, "No, I've got to finish sci-fi novel
number umpteen here," but, gee whiz, if they're asking,
why not go?  ACCD is one of the world's most-famed
design schools, and justly so.  I was flattered.

I was in residence for a couple of weeks at Cranbrook
School of Design back in the early 90s, and I wrote
the outline and proposal for my novel HOLY FIRE there.
That turned out to be one of my better books.
So, y'know, I'll do it.  What the hey.

What's the worst that can happen, right?
The entire coast of Southern California
being wiped out in a giant Pacific tsunami,
that would be about "the worst," right?
And what's that got to do with me doing
some lively futuristic dabbling at a cool
art college in Pasadena?  Nothing, right?
It's all upside!

You know what the problem is with
"ubiquitous computation"?  It took me two
years to figure this out, but first, it isn't
"ubiquitous," and second, it isn't "computation."
Now all I have to do is go back to the
concrete and rebar of my sci-fi novel and start
over.

In the meantime, I wrote some short stories.
They're a departure for me.  They're breaking
the mold -- to the extent that I ever had a mold.
Here's one:

http://www.scifi.com/scifiction/originals/
  
## 3 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 2 Jan 05 12:20

    
That's great; "A Bug's Life" on steroids (with a few pheromones thrown in)...

Is ubiquitous computing dead? Or did we just apply the wrong label? I always 
thought there would be more devices embedded in the environment, but assigning 
addresses to many devices seemed challenging, and there was the issue of power 
supply. And I still hear a lot of buzz about nanotechnology.

Is the book just shelved for a bit, or are you blowing it off and waiting for a 
blast from the muse?
  
## 4 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 3 Jan 05 02:16

    
*Well, I do hope to work on the book this year. After all,
I'm under contract to do it.  Never having been a teacher,
I naively don't know how grueling teaching is, but it's
not like they made me head of the department.

*It's a really profound notion, "ubiquitous computation,"
but I think it's badly formulated, because it implies
this smooth layer of magic wireless fudge that's
uniform everywhere, and it also suggests that number-crunching
on heavy iron is the main thing that gets done
with that capacity.

I believe "Internet of Things" is a somewhat better
way to put it, because here we get to think
with some proper wariness of a phenomenon
that's hugely powerful and transformative, but also screwed-up,
corrupt, invasive, patchy and dangerous -- 
in other words, we start thinking about it
as if it were a real technology.

My novel  is about people who understand this
and live with it on a daily basis, in various
subcultures and situations, so, once I've
figured out the conceptual core of it, I'm hoping it
comes along fairly briskly.

I'm assuming I can stop myself from making lamps.

http://wiredblogs.tripod.com/sterling/index.blog?start=1087486844
  
## 5 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 05 15:34

    
What are your educational objectives for the design class?
  
## 6 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 3 Jan 05 20:32

    
(Note: Bruce reminds me that he's traveling tomorrow, therefore might
be silent for a bit.)
  
## 7 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 4 Jan 05 00:06

    
I don't board the plane till 2.  It'll be interesting to see if I can
do this while hopping through planetary airports in puddles of 
credit-card wi-fi.

My so-called "classes" are gonna be a series of futurist
labs where we ponder big flashy near-term tech trends and
speculate about what designers ought to do to exploit them.

My educational objectives are to learn something myself.

In design schools, people do projects and actually design
stuff, so presumably I'll be sitting in at a lot of
"crit sessions."  If you've never been in one of these,
they're kinda like psychoanalysis, but for objects.

As a further fillip, I'm officially part of the ACCD 
photography department, which, at least, ought
to give me an excuse to buy a decent digital
camera.  For some reason, my blog, "Beyond the
Beyond," has grown ever more thick with snapshots.
Last week, I stuck some video in it.
It's lousy video, but hey -- I'm Mr Multimedia
now, look out,  http://www.warrenellis.com.
  
## 8 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 04:48

    
Getting to the state of the world (which is increasingly
well-dcoumented by amateur video these days), we've just had an epic
disaster of another kind in Southeast Asia, and earlier in the year the
US coast was slammed by a succession of intense hurricanes, and we'll
probably see more catastrophic weather as a result of climate change.
What are your thoughts about the social and political impact of
catastrophic disruptions?  How much battering will our essential
systems (electrical power, water and food distribution, etc.) take?
  
## 9 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 04:59

    
As a reference for that last question, here's an interesting op-ed by
Simon Winchester, the author of "Krakatoa: The Day the World Exploded,
August 27, 1883": 

http://www.nytimes.com/2004/12/29/opinion/29winchester.html?pagewanted=1

"Given these cascades of disasters past and present, one can only
wonder: might there be some kind of butterfly effect, latent and
deadly, lying out in the seismic world? There is of course no hard
scientific truth - no firm certainty that a rupture on a tectonic
boundary in the western Pacific (in Honshu, say) can lead directly to a
break in a boundary in the eastern Pacific (in Parkfield), or another
in the eastern Indian ocean (off Sumatra, say). But anecdotally, as
this year has so tragically shown, there is evidence aplenty."
  
## 10 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 4 Jan 05 08:24

    
In Zurich, slurping email off wifi, boarding for Paris....
  
## 11 of 74: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 4 Jan 05 10:22

    
Wildly hopping about!   

Jon, as a former geology student, (whether that makes me more or less
credible), I had a strong take on that quote.  While Bruce circles the 
planet, I'll go out on a limb and say that regions can have relatively 
quiet times and then wake up again, but overall the patterns take place on 
such a long time frame that most patterns we can perceive in our lives 
are more likely coincidence. 

Now perhaps we can get others who know more than I on this subject
to read that article and comment on it.
  
## 12 of 74: David Gault (dgault) Tue 4 Jan 05 13:35

    

Hi Bruce,  Snappy New Year

This is a good chance to thank you for the work you highlight
on the Viridian site.  I have felt since I heard that there had
been a big ass quake underwater off Indonesia that I had a line
on the worst case and so far it's coming true.  As the recovery
of the infrastructure moves along,  I fear the results,  but at least
I can picture it,  again thanks to the stuff I read via Viridian.

Specifically,  the projections of threat to coastlines with 
low elevation rise as global warming proceeds seem to have come
true in about 45 minutes.  

I hope you or your cohort get involved in the recovery planning.
  
## 13 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 4 Jan 05 14:03

    

Now inside Charles De Gaulle airport, hiring wifi and sucking laptop
voltage off the plug of a defunct Coke machine.  This French airport
is lavishly hung with worshipful poster portraits of various
Nobel Peace Prize winners.  Could there be a message here, I wonder?

This tsunami is a healthy reminder that the world has disasters
worse than those we inflict on ourselves.  We seem to be
in the time of the "Sixth Great Extinction" thanks to the
human impact on the biosphere, but hey, there were five other
Great Extinctions that really did happen long before we started 
playing with matches.

I also saw that Winchester thing and was kind of nonplussed with it.
So, okay, suppose there were a ghastly "butterfly effect in the
seismic world." Suppose, say, some godforsaken place in Siberia or
the Deccan yawns open and disgorges forty cubic kilometers
of red-hot volcanic basalt. (Such things have been known
to happen.)   I reckon that'd be mighty bad, a real scifi disaster,
but what are we supposed to do about that, send each other SMS 
messages? Should we walk up the Embarcadero and Market Street
with "THE END IS NEAR" signs?  Let's face, civilization's
goose would be thoroughly cooked through no fault of
our own!  Most species would die, like they customarily do
in Great Extinctions.  The scattered remnants of the human race 
would just try not to be one of 'em.

I doubt there's anything constructive much we could do to save
civilization from such an eventuality, even if we knew that 
the event was coming. What can't be cured must be endured,
so I'm inclined not to worry my pretty head about it.

Let's talk about it from another perspective.
If you've got a choice between two worst-case scenarios:
a planet whose atmosphere is wrecked by giant volcanoes,
and a planet whose atmosphere was wrecked by Exxon-Mobil,
hey, there's no question that first one is vastly preferable.
Natural disasters, as opposed to human-inflicted ones,
can actually improve our morale.

I mean, look at the warm, snuggly, aren't-we-wonderful
reaction to the mayhem that hit the shores of Tamil Nadu,
compared to the who-us, no-way, talk-to-my-lawyer reaction
that still surrounds Bhopal.   

When a giant tidal wave hits Asia, Bush pulls his own 
dad out of mothballs, but when the Arctic melts from 
climate change,  permafrost forests fall over drunkenly 
and Eskimo villages slide into the thawing muck, 
everybody in the Republican Party
looks all pie--eyed, quotes the Bible and blames
hurricanes on lesbians.

We're doing practically nothing useful about climate
change and it's a steadily mounting disaster.
I do think the next decades are going to see a whole
lot of paramilitary Operations Other Than War in
reaction to astonishingly bad weather.  So, well,
an event like the tsunami gives us the chance to refine
our disaster-response chops.  They could use the
improvement.

I'm digging the tsunami coverage on WORLDCHANGING.
Those guys rock so hard, I almost stopped crying
in my beer over WHOLE EARTH REVIEW.

http://www.worldchanging.com
  
## 14 of 74: Dave Christenson (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 14:28

    
Email from Dave Christenson:

To me, the case for anthropogenic global warming is strong enough to
justify (democraticly approved) public policy changes. Nonetheless the
connection between anthropogenic emissions and the global climate
clearly still has unknown complex interactions, and its even possible
that other "natural" (non human) forces are far more signifigant
climate factors.

Thus, I find that the poplular and media belief in of the scientific
certainty of anthropogenic global warming to be another example of the
wrong headedness of "common sense."

Do you have any concern that popular misconceptions about the
certainty of the science (art?) of global climate forcasting will have
adverse impacts on public policy?
  
## 15 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 14:30

    
Note to readers who aren't members of the WELL: you can still
participate in this discussion by sending your comments or questions to
inkwell-hosts@well.com. The inkwell.vue team of volunteer hosts will
post your emails in this thread. Be sure to clarify that you want your
comment posted!
  
## 16 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 14:49

    
Bruce, as a member of the WorldChanging team, thanks for the kind
words. WorldChanging bloggers also started the web site coordinating
tsunami resource and relief information at
http://tsunamihelp.blogspot.com, and the tsunami help section at
WikiNews (http://en.wikinews.org/wiki/Tsunami_Help). 

Speaking of great extinctions... the reverse seems to be happening. I
keep seeing news accounts of new species discovery. Can't recall seeing
so many new species appear in the past... though perhaps it's not
unusual, and I just hadn't noticed.

Cryptozoology may be a growth industry?
  
## 17 of 74: David Gault (dgault) Tue 4 Jan 05 19:36

    
Are new species really "appearing"?  Aren't they new only in the
sense of newly classified?  
  
## 18 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 4 Jan 05 20:09

    
It's probably more accurate to say "new species discovered," rather
than "appearing," and in some cases, like those discovered in the murky
depths of ocean trenches, that makes sense. But when we hear that
they're discovering new species of mammals and birds - where were they
before we discovered 'em? (One answer is at
http://www.indystar.com/articles/5/206358-5475-010.html: "Dr. Colleen
McCann, curator of primates at the Bronx Zoo, said these discoveries
suggested that, despite the destructive activities of people, there
were still 'tiny pockets of habitat that have yet to be discovered.'")
It still throws me, though, given the extensive searches and researches
done today.

But I digress... Dave Christenson's question is still in queue:

"Do you have any concern that popular misconceptions about the
certainty of the science (art?) of global climate forcasting will have
adverse impacts on public policy?"
  
## 19 of 74: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Tue 4 Jan 05 20:42

    


Hiya, Bruce.  Thanks from me as well for the nice words for WorldChanging.
  
## 20 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 05 02:16

    
 Nonetheless the
connection between anthropogenic emissions and the global climate
clearly still has unknown complex interactions,

"Unknown complex interactions."  You can say the same for
lung cancer.  You a three-pack a day man, Dave?

Nobody can predict what particular shape and size a stormcloud is
going to be, but that doesn't mean you ought to
go play golf in the lightning.

I'm now back in the Paris airport again where we
just observed a three minute silence, mandated
by the European Union, in solidarity with the
tsunami victims.  At least, I think that's what just
went down; my French is one of the best.

Also, this &*&%$#^ wifi provider doesn't want
to play nice with Safari.

Here's a great place to go look for some scientific
doubts about global warming, because, y'know,
there aren't any any more.  The denial is all spin now, it's  the
stormy twin of Creationism.

The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change – (Science Magazine –
December 3, 2004)
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/306/5702/1686

In recent years, all major scientific bodies in the United States
whose members' expertise bears directly on the matter have issued
similar statements to the effect that that Earth's climate is being
affected by human activities. 928 abstracts, published in refereed
scientific journals between 1993 and 2003, and listed in the ISI
database with the keywords "climate change". The 928 papers were
divided into six categories: explicit endorsement of the consensus
position, evaluation of impacts, mitigation proposals, methods,
paleoclimate analysis, and rejection of the consensus position. Of all
the papers, 75% fell into the first three categories, either explicitly
or implicitly accepting the consensus view; 25% dealt with methods or
paleoclimate, taking no position on current anthropogenic climate
change. Remarkably, none of the papers disagreed with the consensus
position. Admittedly, authors evaluating impacts, developing methods,
or studying paleoclimatic change might believe that current climate
change is natural. However, none of these papers argued that point.
  
## 21 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 05 04:30

    
I keep going back to my interview with Dr. James White of the
University of Colorado when I was writing "Being Green in 2001" for the
issue of Whole Earth Review that you edited. Here's a relevant
excerpt:

(begin quote)
James White: My own research tells me that climate change is not this
give and take, push and shove kind of linear system where if we
increase CO² by X, we get X climate change; if we increase it by 2X, we
get 2X climate change. And that is really what the models give us
back, because the models don't have mode changes, the models don't
have... if North Atlantic deep water fails, a sophisticated model that
can handle that. But if you look at the way climate has changed
historically, going back over the history of the earth, it's not a
little bit here, a little bit there. It's more like my little brother,
when we were kids. I would pester him, and he didn't respond, and I
would pester him more, and he would blow up, and yell and scream at me.
When Mom asked me what I did, I said "All I did was poke him once,
Mom." Not talking about all that energy I built up in my little brother
with all those other tormenting little pokes. And it's that kind of
nonlinear behavior that makes waiting for the shoe to drop a rather
dangerous activity. You don't really want to wait until you get a big
climate change before you do something.

Jon Lebkowsky: We don't know what all the factors are, correct?

James White: I think the sad reality is that we may, before all is
said and done, get a big climate change, and that may be the mobilizing
factor. Some people have argued that we'll need that. We'll need the
big change, the grizzly bear set free in the house before we deal with
the bears in the yard.

Jon Lebkowsky: Won't it be too late?

James White: It'll be too late to handle that climate change. It won't
be too late to adapt. I find it very difficult to support the notion
of Armageddon. We may be heading for rough times in terms of growing
the food we need. We may be headed for tough times particularly in
terms of the first world/third world relationship. But we're already on
rough times now. For crying out loud, the net flow of wealth in this
world is from poor nations to rich nations.
(end quote)

A couple of important points in that discussion: first, it's important
to think in terms of climate change rather than global warming,
because, because it's not necessarily "warming," and manifestations can
vary in different parts of the world and across time. The other point
is that we're too late to counter our impact on climate change, and
because it's so complex, we can't exactly predict the effects of
climate change. But we have to learn how to adapt.

The "Attention Conservation Notice" in your last Viridian message a
month ago said "This may be the last Viridian Note you read this year,
because I'm wintering in Belgrade, Serbia. Once I'm teaching design in
Pasadena, however, you can expect all Viridian hell to break loose."

So you're back from Belgrade and on your way to Pasadena: what are
your Viridian plans?
  
## 22 of 74: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Wed 5 Jan 05 09:14

    
From off-Well:

As for these 'new species eruptions' we've been experiencing, I hope
that most of the
increase is due to the increased fine-tunedness of our classifications,
as well as the searching
(anything new from J. Craig Venter's exploits, anyone?), but there's
also the 'flushing factor' -
get enough people beating the environment at the edges, we're bound to
drive a few 'new'
species out of their hidey holes and into the harsh light of day.

I'm rather surprised that we haven't exposed some really virulent ones,
myself.  I fully expect an
avian bird flu / Hanta virus crossbreed to make an appearance in the
not-too-distant future, but
maybe it's just the post-holiday/travel blues talking...

       Duncan Stewart
  
## 23 of 74: from HENRY (tnf) Wed 5 Jan 05 09:43

    



Henry writes:




Hi Bruce,

I've recently become aware of the emerging technology
of 3D printing and consumer-level computer controlled
manufacturing (partly through reading your blog). The
technology is in its earliest stages and has yet to
show its full range of possibilities, but the
potential advantages are certainly numerous and
exciting. However, I also wonder about other
implications.

First, the potential "Napsterization" of physical
objects: why buy, for example, the latest Star Wars
action figure when you could download a hacked CAD
file free from the Web and make one for the price of
materials? I know the costs won't bear out initially,
but I assume such "makers" will get cheaper over time,
and just the above scenario could kill the toy
industry (which is usually wobbly in the best of
times). What are the future social and economic
effects of this technology?

Then there's the possibility of homemade (no
engineering skills required) high-tech weapons:
time-delay bombs, mines, antitank weapons,
antiaircraft missile components. Would "makers" be
classified (and restricted) as weapons? How would
nations and global organizations react?

I imagine you'll have more to say on this subject once
you start at school, but I'd love to hear any initial thoughts.
  
## 24 of 74: from JELLY BEAN QUEEN (tnf) Wed 5 Jan 05 09:52

    



Jelly Bean Queen writes:




Hi Jon,

Love reading your stuff, keep up the good work!! I'd like to add this
(utopian) question to the chat with Bruce Sterling if you agree. Perhaps you
could comment on this too?  Thanks, Jel


Although world 'issues' are increasingly interrelated and complex, individual
issues are usually singled out (for convenience or for practical reasons -
NGO's or pressure groups usually only have resources to attempt one 'issue'
at a time). Eg: A spokesperson cites evidence that denies man-influenced
climate change and justifies proceeding with business as usual, ignoring
other factors such as pollution, wilderness destruction or worldwide equity
and insufficient natural resources to allow all countries to consume at the
same rate as developed nations.

How can we shift focus & accountability to the broader picture, ie: a 'Nasty
Factor' - a combination of burning issues (such as global equity, pollution,
health, human rights, climate change, natural resource limits, biodiversity
and wilderness protection). Imagine a corporation says it isn't convinced
about climate change per se, but acknowledges its (widget) undoubtably has an
excess of 'Nasty Factors' , so they develop a new eco-friendly, sustainable
(widget)". Ostensibly, the growth of CSR should facilitate this, but well,
you know...

Jel
  
## 25 of 74: Berliner (captward) Wed 5 Jan 05 09:58

    
And Bruce, since this won't take a minute, could you remind us how to
subscribe to your always-exciting Viridian newsletter? This will
benefit both those who are just tuning in and the Very Stupid who
changed e-mail addresses this spring and then couldn't figure out how
to get back on! 
  
## 26 of 74: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Wed 5 Jan 05 12:09

    
Wouldn't you say the phenomenon Jelly Bean describes has a lot more to
do with news media that doesn't report the connections?  

Plus, corporate PR professionals (including the ones who craft the
policy emissions of the Bush administration) are smart at wagging the
dog.  They know that they can deforest, strip mine, belch fine particle
pollution and sell multi-ton gas hogs even more effectively if these
connections remain unexamined by the public, and tailor their
communication accordingly.

NGOs often seem to be one-issue organizations because the people
involved love birds, or bears, or some other aspect of the biota to
distraction.  Most members of Audubon could make the connections
between air quality, wetlands destruction, weather changes, pesticides,
West Nile and birds any day of the week.
  
## 27 of 74: Seahorses of the Liver (mnemonic) Wed 5 Jan 05 12:57

    

"Also, this &*&%$#^ wifi provider doesn't want
 to play nice with Safari."

Bruce, I often have to use the ancient, creaky Internet Explorer to
arrange the setup with a wifi provider. After the connection is set up, you
can revert to Safari (or, better yet, Firefox).

Speaking as one OSX dude to another.
  
## 28 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 05 14:10

    
BTW speaking of climate change, we're in for heavy weather this week:
http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/nationworld/2002141092_storm05.html
  
## 29 of 74: frequent flyer (sleepyjt) Wed 5 Jan 05 16:19

    
Anecdotal argument for climate change:

As Bruce flits through the skies of Europe, I can offer the comforting
fact that only about 50% of the flights I've taken around Europe in
the last year or so have experienced severe turbulence.  And only about
25% of those over the continental US!

By severe I mean a 757 equivalent unable to maintain assigned altitude
in cruise, then requiring the pilot to use repeated abrupt throttle
changes and sharp rudder adjustment throughout approach just to bring
it back to level flight from time to time, hopefully coincident with
touchdown.  Nothing like being slammed sideways at 38,000 feet while
watching the drink trolley go airborne!

I've flown quite a bit over the last 15 years, all over the world, and
never experienced that particular form of unpleasantness until fairly
recently...but now I almost take it for granted.

Is the weather getting worse...or are airlines willing to fly in
conditions they would have considered too marginal a few years ago?
  
## 30 of 74: frequent flyer (sleepyjt) Wed 5 Jan 05 16:20

    
..forgetting possibility 3 that I am simply unlucky...
  
## 31 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 5 Jan 05 20:04

    
My flights seem eerily smooth lately, which makes
up for the severe dysfunctionality of the security apparats
on the ground.  My checked bag disappeared in Paris, was
nowhere to be seen in the customs port of Houston, and mysteriously
reappeared in Austin.  Of course, they insisted that
I check the bag ; I would never have done that voluntarily,
since the commonly subject them to weird antics.

I'm not quite sure what the heck I'll do with Viridian List.
Having an email list at all seems kind of archaic now.
Why not an RSS feed, blog, podcasting, etc etc?  

If you want to join it, nothing simpler; just
send me email.

I just had an odd media experience in an aircraft
over the Atlantic.  There was multichannel video
installed in the back of the seat.  After my computer
ran out of juice, I had to channel-surf to avert
utter boredom, so I ended
up watching a mainstream-TV American cop
show off the back of the neighbor's chair.

It immediately struck me that it must have
been a COUPLE OF YEARS since I actually sat
down and watched an entire television dramatic
episode.  I never much liked
or hated television, I was more or less willing
to watch it if the opportunity came up, but
compared to websurfing, this TV show had
the dusty, archaic feeling of vaudeville.

I mean, those are real scripts, talented actors...
it was the kind of vaguely progressive
TV drama fodder that's supposed to be
"punchy," "hard-hitting," "sizzling"...  It
was like watching ice melt, as a
media experience.

I wonder if television is doomed. 
  
## 32 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 5 Jan 05 21:07

    
Welcome back! There's already some questions in queue. Meanwhile as
Viridian webmaster, I should note that we're not posting each new
message on the front page at ViridianDesign.org using Blogger, and
there's an RSS feed for the Viridian notes at
http://www.viridiandesign.org/rss.xml. 
  
## 33 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 05 10:03

    
"First, the potential "Napsterization" of physical
objects: why buy, for example, the latest Star Wars
action figure when you could download a hacked CAD
file free from the Web and make one for the price of
materials? I know the costs won't bear out initially,
but I assume such "makers" will get cheaper over time,
and just the above scenario could kill the toy
industry (which is usually wobbly in the best of
times). What are the future social and economic
effects of this technology?"

*Well, as readers of my weblog know, I just got
back from Serbia.  The extent of product counterfeiting
there is really shocking.  You can't squeeze a tube of
toothpaste without wondering if the thing is faked and, if so,
exactly what substance is scrubbing the inside
of your mouth.

This isn't the old version of product counterfeiting,
either. This is some pretty sophisticated manufacturing
by people who obviously would have the skill to make,
say, real shoes; except they'd rather undercut Reebok
in order to line their own pockets without having
to pay for Reebok's global PR budget.

And you don't know who they are; and you'll never
know who they are; and if the product harms you,
you have no redress whatsoever.  It's 
sinister.

Needless to say the purported "government" that
more or less runs "Serbia and Montenegro" is not going to do
a thing about this.  When is the last time
you saw an internationally-known Serbian
brand?  They're just not gonna play the NATO
branding game; they're like Adbusters,
only they mean it.

http://adbusters.org/metas/corpo/blackspotsneaker/
  
## 34 of 74: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 6 Jan 05 11:53

    

>  And you don't know who they are; and you'll never
>  know who they are; and if the product harms you,
>  you have no redress whatsoever.  It's
>  sinister.

Yes.  It's easy to be cynical about branding, but knowing 
the identity of manufacturers is of value to consumers, no 
doubt about it...  I hadnt thought of knockoffs as corporate 
identity theft nor as a breach of faith with consumers who might need
redress before now. 

That scenario is sinister enough, but toss in some real life internet
phenomena like trojan horses.  In what ways can a physical object make its
purchaser a slave to someone who just enjoys messing with people -- or
punishing consumption they feel is excessive, or terrorizing the minions
of the great satan or global capitalism, for that matter?   Ugh. Where 
can this go... ownzered by your trojan cell phone, crashed by your 
infected car?  
 
  
## 35 of 74: Dennis Wilen (the-voidmstr) Thu 6 Jan 05 12:25

    
<bruces>, are you saying the Serbs and Montenegroans have an explicit
anti-intellectual property component to their counterfeiting
activities?  It's not just for the money?

Or is it just "collateral damage?"
  
## 36 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 05 12:39

    
At least they're not giving the products away. Bill Gates would almost
certainly appreciate the capitalist mind-set of these hard-working
Serbian entrepreneurs who, though they may be making unauthorized use
of brand names, at least want MONEY for their wares... unlike American
Free Culture commies who want to give everything away.
  
## 37 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 6 Jan 05 12:59

    
This is a popular effort, this fakery.  People in the Balkans just
don't think in a state-centered way any more.  Everybody's
his own smuggler; everybody's got cousins offshore who send
money and gifts home.  They all experienced international
sanctions for years.  They're not gonna strengthen the hands
of intellectual property lords like the WTO or WIPO or RIAA.
It just means building new whips so that NATO and the Europeans
and the UN can scourge them.

So it's not like a state conspiracy to pilfer; it's more like
the Dutch and hashish.  You just don't look real hard,
and the traffic takes care of itself.

A lot of the retailers who are behind the flow of
fakes are refugees who lost everything.  They were
living out of car trunks.  Now they're living out
of kiosks, and they're kinda nicely settled in there;
some of those Balkan kiosks have TVs, neon,
and smokestacks.
  
## 38 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 6 Jan 05 16:20

    
You were among the first authors to put substantial works online as
"literary freeware." What do you think of Creative Commonas and Free
Culture - threat, or menace? Stimulus for innovation or communist
conspiracy?
  
## 39 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 05 05:07

    
Well, Free Culture is not a "communist conspiracy."  A communist
conspiracy
would want to nationalize intellectual property through the
dictatorship
of the proletariat (assuming that it recognized intellectual property
as something other than "theft".)

I would classify Creative Commons as an ingenious if somewhat
complicated scheme which may or may not prove to have legs
as an actual workaday institution.  All these copyleft schemes
have to involve somebody who cares enough to keep track
of who copylefted what under what circumstances.  Creative
Commons aren't public domain, they're not abandonware.
They're gonna require some kind of bureaucracy and some
kind of grievance squad.  That makes them vulnerable,
and with the passage of time, possibly top-heavy.

I wonder, for instance, if Creative Commons couldn't
be harassed to death by a deliberate blizzard of SCO-style
petty lawsuits.  I also wonder if their zealots might
just get bored and despair over the dullness of their
bookkeeping when they expected the Creative Revolution, baby.

As far as the "threat or menace" aspect goes,
the menace is not in some Saddam dictatorship
of creative Marxist-Lessigists.  The danger
is  in the general collapse of law and order
and its replacement by nothing in particular.

I'm getting worried that the WTO - WIPO regime,
the general respect for law and order in the realm of
intellectual property, may just collapse worldwide.  It may 
fail through imperial overstretch and get nibbled
to death by global guerrillas.  It may be
that as the means of production get offshored into
areas like China and India, where there traditionally
has not been little respect for IP, the West's standards
of behavior may simply be ignored. 

That fish is rotting from the head down. If the USA
is itself widely regarded as an outlaw state, why
should anybody pay even lip service to the IP interests
of its multinationals?  That system cannot be
enforced with cruise missiles; the global populace
in general has to agree that the scheme is legitimate
and just and the best way to produce prosperity.  
Otherwise they just pirate stuff and buy
fakes.

People don't physically have to pay money for IP;
they're merely required to do it.  So trying to
drag money out of IP means imposing a regulatory
framework on globalization.  That's not easy.  
It's like trying to dam up black water.

The WTO doesn't run the world.  Seen from
inside, they're very rickety, balky and feeble.  
There's just not a lot of enforcement power there.
Their appeal is mostly moral, believe it or not.

Global law and order of any kind is in deep trouble now.
We could find ourselves living in a "failed globe", where 
states fail all over the place, including the USA.  Then most
everybody would find themselves living in the way
that the planet's majority have always lived.
And that's not the "American Way," that's
the third-world way.

Instead of a thriving Group of 7 with its vast
tinkertoy of advanced-state infrastructure and
legalisms, we could find that the 21st century
globe looks a lot more like Brazil. Like  Turkey.  China.
India.  Big, ramshackle, semi-stable, randomly
violent, mostly poor, amazingly corrupt.  

Given that Creative Commons is a lawyer's invention and wondrously
and nitpickingly legalistic, I wonder what kind
of future Creative Commons would have in such a world.  I tend
to think that people would just shrug and forget
it was around.
  
## 40 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 05 14:43

    
Don't Americans seem to believe that we've already has a collapse of
law and order, to which the respond by electing candidates who promise
more social control? Isn't that what follows a perceived social chaos -
an authoritarian backlash?
  
## 41 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 7 Jan 05 16:50

    
As far as I can figure it, that's in reverse order.
I mean, in the Balkans, it was Tito, an authoritarian
of the first order, whose social order went to
pieces.  Then there was some nasty Balkan
phony-war terror-war bloodletting that looked
very rigorous and tough-guy, but was just a front
for the well-nigh complete ethical, political,
military, economic and social rot in Yugoslavia.
The place imploded.  It's statelets now.

Bosnia, Herzegovina, Kosova, I don't even
know what the proper name is for those
entities.  UN protectorates?  Global colonies?
NATO hot potatoes that are now somewhat cooler EU
potatoes?  We haven't even invented the
terminology.  We're still trying to pretend that
we can state-build them back to the way they
were.

The late Zoran Djindjic kinda figured that after Milosevic
was deposed, he'd act like the take-charge revolutionary
leader and shake some law and order back into
Serbian government.  But the biggest smuggling
gang in town just shot Djindjic in the back and
he died on the spot.  His successors are a lot
more circumspect.  They know that the state
can be whacked in the streets by the gangs
and that nobody that matters will turn a hair.

The situation is Serbia
is actually kind of stable.  It doesn't have
a grim, violent feeling.  The police are not
feared by the populace.  You don't see
blatant acts of race-hate.  It's just that
the place is profoundly crooked.  It's like a world
capital of black globalization.

I know this all sounds pretty grim, farfetched,
alien and freaky to most Americans, but that's 
more or less what happened to our own
dark twin, the "Soviet Union."  You remember
them, that other continental superpower full
of white guys and bristling with military
power?   They alienated all their allies,
bogged down fighting Moslems, went broke, and then
collapsed like a burst tire.

People still call that area "the former
Soviet Union", what, fifteen years after the
thing died?  That's like calling Texas "the
former Confederate State" in about 1880!

I think people instinctively call it "the former
Soviet Union" because there's so little
national character to the diffuse entities
that appeared after that collapse.  Putin
makes authoritarian noises and can bust
the heads of some of his moguls, but the
guy's got no economy.  There's no rule
of law to speak of.  The Russians pipe oil and gas.  That's
about it.  They're a rentier enterprise.

Serbia looks like a jolly vacation spot
compared to the Russian situation.
They're losing half a million people a year
in Russia.  Their demographics are catastrophic.
You'd think they'd pick their socks up and
patch a civilization together, but they're
dying off like the buffalo.  By the middle
of the century half the Russian ethnic
group will be gone.  Just, you know,
Gone With the Wind.

Nobody's killing them.  They're not being
invaded by tyrants.  Nobody's putting them
in camps.  But whatever the hell it is that
they've got: the Disorder, the Decline --
man, that stuff is fatal.  It's more serious
to the health of nations than
a major shooting war.  They're
in a tailspin.  

You think they'd get all better if they
elected and installed a bunch of
Republicans?  Or for that matter, Democrats?
  
## 42 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 7 Jan 05 21:10

    
The New American Century may be ready to go there. They see a world in
chaos and disarray, and figure they can fix it with American know-how
and spunk, like Teddy Roosevelt's boys in "The Wind and the Lion,"
which I can imagine they're screening in heavy rotation at the White
House. Despite their bungling, I think these guys really think they're
the only hope for the world.

I suspect you've read Jim Moore's "The Second Superpower Rears Its
Beautiful Head." He says

"As the United States government becomes more belligerent in using its
power in the world, many people are longing for a 'second superpower'
that can keep the US in check.  Indeed, many people desire a superpower
that speaks for the interests of planetary society, for long-term
well-being, and that encourages broad participation in the democratic
process.  Where can the world find such a second superpower?  No nation
or group of nations seems able to play this role, although the
European Union sometimes seeks to, working in concert with a variety of
institutions in the field of international law, including the United
Nations.  But even the common might of the European nations is barely a
match for the current power of the United States.

There is an emerging second superpower, but it is not a nation. 
Instead, it is a new form of international player, constituted by the
'will of the people' in a global social movement.  The beautiful but
deeply agitated face of this second superpower is the worldwide peace
campaign, but the body of the movement is made up of millions of people
concerned with a broad agenda that includes social development,
environmentalism, health, and human rights.   This movement has a
surprisingly agile and muscular body of citizen activists who identify
their interests with world society as a whole—and who recognize that at
a fundamental level we are all one.  These are people who are
attempting to take into account the needs and dreams of all 6.3 billion
people in the world—and not just the members of one or another
nation...."

Could something like this work? A loose network of global citizens
connected online and united in their alienation from their various
governments - governments that don't seem to be effective in doing what
governments are theoretically supposed to do, maintain some semblance
of order, justice, safety?
  
## 43 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 05 05:35

    
"Could something like this work? A loose network of global citizens
connected online and united in their alienation from their various
governments - governments that don't seem to be effective in doing
what
governments are theoretically supposed to do, maintain some semblance
of order, justice, safety?"

Well, I've been looking for that for a long time -- "post-national
governance."  "Twilight of Sovereignty" and all that, this is one of
the oldest riffs in the cyberpunk metier.  

Not a new question at all.  Back in the early 80s,
we used to have it figured that multinational corporations would
do it, you know, some of those Japanese Zaibatsu Lifetime Employment
Corporate Feudalist Apparats,  They should have had the world
well sorted by now.

Well, the megacorps were even more frail than national governments.
You want the classic version of a politically ambitious
multinat, it's Enron.  The guys are one phosphot-dot thick!
As for Japan Inc., it was so subject to regulatory capture
that the entire population ended up sitting on their hands.

What  does seem to have happened is not corporate dominance
but  the arrival on the scence of  a new class
of ultrarich moguls, your basic "They Rule" crowd.

http://www.theyrule.net/

But they don't actually rule, they just profit.
They don't bother to interface with the employees.
They don't bother with labor, they don't even bother
to own the physical means of production; I'm
not sure what these guys do, besides appoint
each other to directorial boards.  Well, I do know
what Enron did.  They ran a vast Ponzi scheme.
I know what Mikhail Khodokovsky of Yukos did.
Same thing, basically.  

We're not gonna find
any "semblance of order, justice, safety" around the
likes of Enron and Yukos -- heck, they can't
even offer the  semblance of a genuinely profit-making
capitalist enterprise.

Then there's that Second Superpower pitch, which,
frankly, reeks of bohemian arrogance to me.
What, like the Seattle 99 crowd are the only people
in the world who can use email?  

"A loose network of global citizens
connected online and united in their alienation from their various
governments"  -- you just described Al Qaeda.  Obviously
there's profound destructive potential there, but when
did Al Qaeda ever provide anybody with a "semblance of order,
justice and safety"?  Taliban Afghanistan?  Chechnya?
Fallujah? Kashmir?  Is this what the world's being offered
as liberated zones and models of Islamic moral integrity?
They can burn. but they can't build; they're a global
suicide cult.

Did you ever see that last-reel scene in "Lawrence of Arabia"
where the heroic Arabs finally seize Damascus and the
place burns down in their care?  Man, that's Al Qaeda all over.
When I see various  NGOs storming the WTO, I really wonder
what happens when you give these cats the car-keys.
Where's the agenda?  And if they got one, why can't it get votes?

I especially like it when the left starts talking about the
*right wing* Second Superpower, the "vast right-wing
conspiracy" that tried to lynch Clinton, the "Straussian
Republikudnik NeoCons" plotting in their Iran-Neocontra White House
basements...  Because that's what a Second Superpower looks
like to you when you don't agree with its politics.
It's a horrifying, irresponsible, illegitimate conspiracy.
Unless your friends are doing it.  Then it's a movement!

Paul Wolfowitz would also nod and agree with the pitch there,
"A loose network of global citizens
connected online and united in their alienation from their various
governments - governments that don't seem to be effective in doing
what
governments are theoretically supposed to do, maintain some semblance
of order, justice, safety?" --  except he's got that figured for
a critique of NATO and the UN.  He considers all that a glowing
justification
for American military unilateralism.  

I don't think we're gonna find the exit till the smoke fills the room,
but I'm busy looking.  There's gotta be one around here somewhere.
I don't mind voting, I pay taxes.  All we've gotta do is maintain
a civilization here; how hard can that be?
  
## 44 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 05 09:50

    <scribbled by jonl Sat 8 Jan 05 12:37>
  
## 45 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 05 12:42

    
Having worked a while with the krewe at WorldChanging.com, I think
we're onto something there. Alex Steffen and Jamais Cascio made it
clear up front that they wanted to be about solutions, not problems,
and I think the idea is that, if we toss out enough constructive memes
and point to projects and paradigms that make the world work better for
everybody, that exit you're looking for will begin to emerge. And it's
an exit that actually goes somewhere.

Others are are making bleaker pronouncements, like Jane Jacobs who, in
her new book _Dark Age Ahead_, "sees 'ominous signs of decay' in five
'pillars' of our culture: family, community, higher education, science
and 'self policing by the learned professions.'" (Quoting from the
Publisher's Weekly review.) Also Jared Diamond, whose _Collapse: How
Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed_ looks at examples where
civilzations that have collapsed throughout history, often because they
didn't respond well to some environmental disaster.

Assuming that we have societal decay (as Jacobs says) and the
increasing potential for environmental disaster, and assuming real
leaders emerged who were willing to take proactive and constructive
steps toward mitigation, have you any thoughts about what those steps
would be? 
  
## 46 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 8 Jan 05 15:37

    
Well, man, I'm a science fiction writer.  So my personal idea
of "proactive and constructive steps" would be, I dunno,
ultra-intelligent posthuman vanilla ice cream for
everybody with a side order of solar-powered
sustainable roller skates.  Wahoo!

If you need some "constructive steps" that are a
little more practical and attainable, there isn't
much wrong with the UN Millennial Development
Goals.  This is what officially passes for an official
consensus future for the global community
at this point in time.

I'm not personally and blazingly ambitious
about this lip-pursing UN agenda, but if we somehow got 
these rather unromantic and plonking goals
accomplished,  there's no question that we'd all 
be a lot better off.


So here you go, then:

1. Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger
Reduce by half the proportion of people living on less than a dollar a
day.
Reduce by half the proportion of people who suffer from hunger.

2. Achieve universal primary education
Ensure that all boys and girls complete a full course of primary
schooling

3. Promote gender equality and empower women
 Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary education
preferably by 2005, and at all levels by 2015

4. Reduce child mortality
 Reduce by two thirds the mortality rate among children under five

5. Improve maternal health
Reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio

6. Combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases
Halt and begin to reverse the spread of HIV/AIDS
Halt and begin to reverse the incidence of malaria and other major
diseases

7. Ensure environmental sustainability

Integrate the principles of sustainable development into country
policies and programmes; reverse loss of environmental resources.
Reduce by half the proportion of people without sustainable access to
safe drinking water.
Achieve significant improvement in lives of at least 100 million slum
dwellers, by 2020.

8. Develop a global partnership for development

 Develop further an open trading and financial system that is
rule-based, predictable and non-discriminatory. Includes a commitment
to good governance, development and poverty reduction—nationally and
internationally.

 Address the least developed countries' special needs. This includes
tariff- and quota-free access for their exports; enhanced debt relief
for heavily indebted poor countries; cancellation of official bilateral
debt; and more generous official development assistance for countries
committed to poverty reduction.

Address the special needs of landlocked and small island developing
States.
Deal comprehensively with developing countries' debt problems through
national and international measures to make debt sustainable in the
long term
In cooperation with the developing countries, develop decent and
productive work for youth.

In cooperation with pharmaceutical companies, provide access to
affordable essential drugs in developing countries.

In cooperation with the private sector, make available the benefits of
new technologies == especially information and communications
technologies.
  
## 47 of 74: RUSirius (rusirius) Sat 8 Jan 05 17:09

    

WorldChanging looks like the Whole Earth Catalogue as a network. 
Seems like a great idea to me....
  
## 48 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 8 Jan 05 18:14

    
Yeah, I agree. Considering the attention WorldChanging is getting, I'm
not really sure why Whole Earth didn't survive.

Th UN set of goals looks great, though the UN itself is constrained by
a US lack of commitment while the country's leaning so far to the
right. See
http://www.thenewamerican.com/tna/2000/10-09-2000/vo16no21_mandate.htm
for an idea of the right-wing perception.

Speaking of science fiction and seeing that rusirius is with us, I'll
ask you the same question I asked him a few days ago:

"Remember the people we knew who were seeing cyberpunk as a political
movement rather than a literary subgenre? I wonder what they're doing
now? That energy was too weird to simply evaporate, no?"
  
## 49 of 74: from ROHIT GUPTA (tnf) Sat 8 Jan 05 19:40

    



Rohit Gupta writes:



"What trends have you extracted from watching the recent Bollywood
product? The industry here is now making films with audience's abroad
as target, almost always, since the local market has been
unpredictable and unresponsive. Also, if you need recommendations from
the classics, give me a holler."

-Rohit Gupta
  
## 50 of 74: Ted (nukem777) Sun 9 Jan 05 02:30

    
Along the same lines as Jon, what do you see as the bridge to any
effective world governing body? The UN, as it is now, seems pretty much
ineffective. And we definitely aren't helping the program. Or do you
see a world government at all? In some senses it seems like we all
better learn Mandarin and hope the Chinese look favorably on our
children. 
  
## 51 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 05 03:46

    
WHOLE EARTH didn't survive because WHOLE EARTH was made
of ink and paper.  I'm looking forward to the day when WORLDCHANGING
starts leaving some solid material traces, however.   Books, T-shirts,
coffee-cups, the usual website CafePress clutter, that's just not
enough.
I'm looking forward to the day when websites start designing
and manufacturing material objects with computer fabrication.
Man, that could happen tomorrow; I may do it myself!

Americans think everything in the world is their fault.
The UN is not some building in New York whose problems
can be solved with American dollars and bayonets.
It's the talking shop for everybody, and most people
aren't American.

The world is gonna have to solve its own problems.
In the climate issue, for instance, the vast majority
of the participants wish that the Americans would
just shut up, go home and sulk.  The world could
likely solve that problem if the Americans would just
put a cork in their mugs and stop pretending that
nothing ever happens without them.

BOLLYWOOD!  Yeah!  Let's talk Bollywood!
And I don't want to talk "classics", either --
to hell with the Indian cinema that's actually good.
I want to talk postnodern Bollywood NRI cinema,
which is, like, a premier window on 
contemporary globalization.

You know the coolest part of "Kabhi Khushi
Khabie Gham?"  It's when Hritik Roshan and
Shah Rukh Khan are swanning around London
and they are *the coolest two guys in London* --
they're sexier, richer, better dressed, and
better dancers than the remnants of the
British Imperial Raj.  They also have
cuter girlfriends and fancier cars.

Man, that rocked my world.  That flick
is the CITIZEN KANE of the Bollywood
family feudal epic.  Karan Johar is
a genius.
  
## 52 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 05 10:39

    
Rohit will have to cover the Bollywod conversation; my taste runs to
quirky indendent films and high-decibel, highly-immersive effects-laden
blockbusters. We just watched "I, Robot," which was supposedly sci-fi,
but I figure the film's robot-men are fantasy, same with Vernor
Vinge's singularity, the creation of superhuman machines. What are your
thoughts on the future of robot intelligence? 
  
## 53 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 05 18:01

    
Frankly, artificial intelligence is hokum.  That idea
has just got no traction at all.  I don't think we're
a whit closer to robot intelligence now than we
were 30 years ago.

I'm a whit closer to California now, though;
I left Austin this morning and I ought to
be in Los Angeles in two days.
  
## 54 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 9 Jan 05 19:05

    
So you must be driving, and we're hoping you can find connectivity
along the way, especially in Las Vegas. Los Angeles has flood warnings
out the wazoo, so you're on your way to a Viridian happening.

The friendly neighborhood Drudge posted this link was "weather
freakout": 
http://news.search.yahoo.com/search/news?p=storms&ei=UTF-8&datesort=1

I can see the headlines now: "World Ends; Texas is Spared."
  
## 55 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 9 Jan 05 19:33

    
So I see.

"Los Angeles Fire Department personnel use heavy equipment to remove
mudslide debris Sunday, Jan. 9, 2005, in Los Angeles. A powerful,
plodding storm drenched California with another consecutive day of
heavy rain turning roadways into rivers, knocking out power to
thousands of homes and setting off mudslides and flooding that shut
down highways. (AP Photo/Ric Francis)"


*Yeah, welcome to sunny California, home of the Unnatural Disaster.
Don't have a tsunami?  Make your own!

*It wouldn't kill me to hang out in El Paso another day.
Carnitas Queretaro, man, that's the stuff!
  
## 56 of 74: It's a new sun to me (nukem777) Mon 10 Jan 05 02:53

    
Before you go completely off on a Bollywood rant, would you talk a bit
about the emerging 'neobiological civilization', some of the tensions
of canon panic and maybe even throw in a bit about the problems of
digital archiving and what's being done on that front?

Tomorrow Now just kicks! Safe driving and enjoy Pasadena.
  
## 57 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 05 04:45

    
Oh man, come on, let me talk about Bollywood.

It's wonderful to see how one can turn on Bollywood
DVDs at parties and have them just clear the room.
Sometimes Americans just flee; you can see the
culture shock just hit them in a wave.

Some of the Bollywood material I find of most merit
is the stuff that actually clears the room *of Indians.*
Like, say, "BOOM," directed by bad boy Kaizad Gustad
and starring Mrs. Salman Rushdie.

http://www.apunkachoice.com/scoop/chirpychat/20040113-0.html

This crazily brilliant mess shot right by the heads of
most anybody who might have appreciated it, but
it's about Bombay supermodels, Bombay couture,
human trafficking, prostitution, Arab wealth and
multinational Muslim gangsters.  It makes no sense,
probably because it's trying so hard to tell the truth.
  
## 58 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 05 05:01

    
You know what? Soon  I'll be living just north of Hollywood!
So I get to TALK FILM!  I'll be in Tinseltown, LA-LA Land!
Man, what a perk!

Maybe I'll actually BECOME A SOUTHERN CALIFORNIAN!! 
What next, eh?  I'm thinking maybe a macrobiotic
diet and an eyelid tuck!

You want to see the state of the art in modern
Bollywood, check out this workhorse.  This is a
genuinely popular hit film made by some pros
on the top of their game.  "Main Hoon Na."

http://www.planetbollywood.com/Film/MainHoonNa/

Bollywood is actually a wounded cinema in a lot
of ways... it seems to have lost touch with its
traditional audience and its revenues have been
severely disturbed by changes in the means of
distribution.  The real key to the glory days of
Bollywood were that cinemas were a place to
get out of the Indian heat, so you could sell
tickets to the air conditioning while presenting
the movie as a kind of billboard.

With better electricity services in India and
home DVD players, Bollywood hit the rocks.
But I enjoy watching its enterprising struggle;
I think it's got a good chance to become
the first truly post-national cinema, a
form of expression by global emigres
for global emigres.

I don't consider myself a real rootin'-tootin'
film critic, but I do know one.

http://www.geocities.com/Tokyo/Island/3102/
  
## 59 of 74: It's a new sun to me (nukem777) Mon 10 Jan 05 05:27

    
Okay, you may rant. I followed your links to discover Veer-Zaara as
well. I'm not sure I need another obsession at this point in my life,
so I will bask in your exuberance.
  
## 60 of 74: It matters who your daddy is. (debbie) Mon 10 Jan 05 08:52

    

Just added Boom to my netflix list, thanks!
  
## 61 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 05 08:53

    
D'you have a top ten list of Bollywood films? And a top ten list of
neobiological entities?
  
## 62 of 74: Dennis Wilen (the-voidmstr) Mon 10 Jan 05 09:03

    
Well then, <bruces>, you are welcome to play your Bollywood DVDs at my
place in the Hollywood Hills, the fabulous CastleVoid, and I promise
you I won't leave the room.

I'll even provide the tikka masala, et al!
  
## 63 of 74: from DAVE PHELAN (tnf) Mon 10 Jan 05 10:01

    



Dave Phelan writes:



Now that Richard A Clarke (former counterterrorism tzar) has weighed in with
his (science?) fictional "transcript of the Tenth Anniversary 9/11 Lecture"
(originally at http://www.theatlantic.com/doc/print/200501/clarke , text
mirrored at http://www.timsteil.com/blog.cfm?ID=35), and
<http://www.crichton-official.com/messageboard.html>Michael Crichton has
planted his flag firmly on the side of Climate Change deniers, is the gap
between fiction and politics now so narrow that the Viridian Principle of
'walking through the walls of the knowledge guilds' is becoming normal?

What other Viridian aims has the Pope-Emperor seen becoming real?


Thanks
Dave Phelan
  
## 64 of 74: Angus MacDonald (angus) Mon 10 Jan 05 12:33

    

[Also, does "BOOM" have the musical numbers?]
  
## 65 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 05 15:01

    
Speaking of Crichton, the scientists at RealClimate made two posts
analyzing his "State of Fear" arguments and pointing out the errors and
omissions:
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php?p=74
http://www.realclimate.org/index.php?p=76
  
## 66 of 74: Jamais Cascio, WorldChanger (cascio) Mon 10 Jan 05 16:01

    
Those are quite lovely takedowns, too -- it's pretty clear that the real
climate scientists at RealClimate have no tolerance for Crichton's
bleatings. RealClimate is at the top of my RSS feed.

Although <jonl> and <emilyg> have quite ably represented WorldChanging here,
let me offer my thanks and appreciation for your support of our efforts,
Bruce.

Just as a note for you all -- my co-conspirator at WorldChanging, Alex
Steffen, will be on stage with Bruce at South by SouthWest this March.
They'll be giving a joint keynote. Should be a blast.
  
## 67 of 74: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 10 Jan 05 19:18

    
That's odd.  A posting of mine vanished utterly.
It was about my number one favorite Bollywood film,
the cyberpunk technothriller QAYAMAT ("Apocalypse").

That must be a sign.  I'm in Phoenix, Arizona right
now.  Tomorrow I'll be wading into flood-stricken
Los Angeles.  What with unloading the car and trying
to get my academic ducks in a row, I can't imagine I'll have time
to do this topic justice.

I have the intuition that 2005 is going to be a whole
decade packed into a year.  They say that education's
very broadening; well, by 2006 I expect to be broader
than a six-lane highway.

So long, and don't be a stranger.
http://blog.wired.com/sterling/
  
## 68 of 74: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 10 Jan 05 20:22

    
The discussion will be here after you've unloaded, if you want to make
your way back and continue. We were just getting warmed up.
  
## 69 of 74: Autumn Storhaug (autumn) Mon 10 Jan 05 20:32

    
I'd like to thank Dave Phelan for sending the link to the Clarke 'lecture.'
I'm going to pick up The Atlantic tomorrow.
  
## 70 of 74: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Mon 10 Jan 05 22:17

    
That's a pretty frightening story.
  
## 71 of 74: from JOSH ELLIS (tnf) Wed 12 Jan 05 10:17

    



Josh Ellis writes:



I wish I'd known you were coming through Vegas. I would have bought you lunch
in thanks for sending my Kangol hat back to me after I drunkenly left it at
your house last SxSW bash.

I've been thinking a lot about this whole notion of America collapsing with a
whimper, not a bang; I've been reading a good bit about Rome recently as
research for a novel, and I'm fascinated by the way that the Empire basically
sputtered out when Constantine moved things to Byzantium. (I'm also quite
interested in how the Byzantines managed to survive for almost 1100 years
without making much of an impact on European culture, but that's a whole
other conversation.)

Here's the thing: I'm having a very hard time reining in my pessimistic
assumptions that Americans are so locked into our current modus operandi that
we're going to be totally incapable of jettisoning all the stupid behaviors
and habits that have gotten us where we are. (I gather Diamond's book is
about these same ideas, I'm gonna pick it up tomorrow). I know a lot of
people who have really neat ideas on living in a sustainable fashion, but for
every smart kid getting his or her tax credit on with solar panels, there's
two dozen more who really, really want an SUV that makes the Humvee look like
a lil' red wagon. And as far as I can tell, these people seem goddamn near
unreachable. They don't know, they don't care, and who the fuck are you to
mess with the party, anyway?

I've always thought the most interesting thing about the Viridian movement is
that it has the (presumably intentional) side effect of making sustainability
sexy for consumers. My question is: do you, Bruce, see that as a primary way
of reaching otherwise disinterested people? How do you get these folks to
quit staring at the pretty bling bling and pay attention? Personally, I've
about given up; I just ridicule them to amuse myself. But I'd like to believe
there's a more constructive solution. Do you think it's possible for us to
collectively hit the brakes? Or do you think we're going to have to have a
nasty full-on collision before we wake the fuck up?

Also: you were talking about Americans being forced to live the way the rest
of the world does. I lived in Turkey when I was a kid, which was a nice eye-
opening experience for a disenfranchised son of suburbia. Do you think it
would come right down to Kurdish-style encampments in Central California? I
tend to think America is so chock full of consumer products that we'd have at
least some sort of cushion -- Turks can't go down to Wal-Mart and buy
ultralight ergonomically-designed six man pup tents, whereas we can. What
sort of goofy post-imperialist scenario do you see as being most likely to
play out in America?



Josh Ellis
  
## 72 of 74: from KAMRAT TUPKO (tnf) Fri 14 Jan 05 11:47

    




Kamrat Tupko writes:





Dear Bruce,

I have a bunch of questions for you.

First one concerns media. You say 'an email list at all seems kind of
archaic now'. But it seems that with your list you obtain a different
feel, flavour, style, and thus effect than with your blog for instance.
And when you ask 'why not RSS feed?' this reminds me of a time when you
said that there will be no RSS feeds on your blog and we all have to
live with it. So what's your take on this now, maybe not on RSS itself,
but on the general craziness with all sorts of online publishing
schemes. I could ask, "Why don't you start posting to a wiki??", I
guess. I felt once that with your blog you were saying that such issues
don't really
matter. But I'm not so sure anymore.

But I'd rather ask, on this subject, what are you doing with your blog?
That is, what is its flavour, style, feel and thus effect? Answering my
own question (!), I think that you are doing an utterly crazy thing: you
are showing us that the Internet, once thought of as so strange by being
detached from the world, is actually rather a receptacle for the
strangeness that's already here, in the world, and it's evenly
distributed! I see you doing this with your musica globalista section,
with your MMORPGing guestblogger, with your shots of Milan and Balkan.
But then, I would ask, don't you worry this is skin deep, that this is a
level of experiencing different cultures comparable to feeling very
multicultural because you dine at a different ethnic restaurant each
day? I remember you posting about obscure Polish movies and, with all
due respect, was unsure how close that got anyone to getting that stuff
(as in the phrase, 'get it?') - if that ever was the goal. Or is the blog
just your wunderkammer, of the sort proposed by Dery, whom you recently
linked to? This pushing of an non-American world through the blog to a
presumably mostly American audience, I see it as a counterpoint to
situations like this conversation, where the subject is 'state of the
world' but the talk often slips to highly local issues located
somewhere between Austin and Hollywood Hills. How curious! You seem to
be saying, beware, the Internet is the world is the crazy great
different place about the existence of which one might forget!!!  Is
that it, do you feel Internauts in the US need to be reminded that there
are great, crazy, popular things going and they nevertheless have no
idea that they exist?

But what interests me the most is you and Eastern Europe. What's your
take on the region? I notice you spend a lot of time in the Balkans,
which to me are a mix of Yugonostalgia, war craziness and new
media savvy. They are so lucky, with all their media centers. And the
further North you go, the less of them you see, and once you get to
Poland, things in the 'getting the new media' category start to look
quite bleak. And then there's the Baltic and you have to stop. We're the
country with the most expensive telephone and internet connection prices
in Europe, maybe even in the world? So I'd like to know what's your take
on the Balkan affinity with the new media. Smart people say Poland is so
big, agricultural, catholic and traditional that the situation is quite
hopeless. It's hard for us to learn from places like the US, but maybe
there's a lesson to be learnt closer, in the Balkans?

And then there's the environment. Would you agree that that's an even
more hopeless issue to deal with in Eastern Europe? What is the right
style, do you have a bag of tricks for preaching Viridianism in Eastern
Europe?

Yours,

Tupko.
  
## 73 of 74: Emily J. Gertz (emilyg) Fri 14 Jan 05 12:40

    
Wow.  Truly hope Bruce circles back around to answer even a tenth of
that!

"...the Internet, once thought of as so strange by being
detached from the world, is actually rather a receptacle for the
strangeness that's already here..." is a lovely observation.  

A lot of us got quite invested in the idea of the internet as an
"other space," back in the 1990s.  

But I was wrong.  Things are really getting interesting *now* when
it's becoming a utility intead of an oddity.
  
## 74 of 74: Bruce Sterling (jonl) Sat 15 Jan 05 04:26

    
(from jonl: I sent Kamrat Tupko's message to Bruce via email, and got
this response:)

I have a bunch of questions for you.

*Those sure are a lot! I'm now in California
and being overwhelmed with administrivia --
I need a to-do list just for my to-do lists.

First one concerns media. You say 'an email list at all seems kind of
archaic now'. But it seems that with your list you obtain a different
feel, flavour, style, and thus effect than with your blog for
instance.

*Yessss?

And when you ask 'why not RSS feed?' this reminds me of a time when
you
said that there will be no RSS feeds on your blog and we all have to
live with it. 

*My blog's run by Tripod! Live with THAT!

So what's your take on this now, maybe not on RSS
itself,
but on the general craziness with all sorts of online publishing
schemes. I could ask, "Why don't you start posting to a wiki??", I
guess. I felt once that with your blog you were saying that such
issues don't really matter. But I'm not so sure anymore.

*It's all about "cognitive loads" and "opportunity costs."
I could explain that, but, well, first it's too hard to think about,
and, uh, I'm busy doing something else right now.

But I'd rather ask, on this subject, what are you doing with your
blog?

*At the moment, it seems to be mostly, uh, therapy.

That is, what is its flavour, style, feel and thus effect? 

Flavour: astringent
Style: autodidactic hodgepodge
Feel: radically and globally scattered
Effect: I get a surprising amount of sympathetic
email

Answering
my
own question (!), I think that you are doing an utterly crazy thing:
you
are showing us that the Internet, once thought of as so strange by
being
detached from the world, is actually rather a receptacle for the
strangeness that's already here, in the world, and it's evenly
distributed! 

*What's crazy about THAT? It's dead obvious!

I see you doing this with your musica globalista section,
with your MMORPGing guestblogger, with your shots of Milan and Balkan.
But then, I would ask, don't you worry this is skin deep, that this is
a
level of experiencing different cultures comparable to feeling very
multicultural because you dine at a different ethnic restaurant each
day?

*I'm in Los Angeles, man! People here do that
routinely!

I remember you posting about obscure Polish movies and, with all
due respect, was unsure how close that got anyone to getting that
stuff
(as in the phrase, 'get it?') - if that ever was the goal. 

*Watch that movie! I promise I understand modern Poland!

Or is the blog just your wunderkammer, of the sort proposed by Dery,
whom you
recently linked to? This pushing of an non-American world through the
blog to a
presumably mostly American audience

*Why presume that, "Kamrat Tupko"?

I see it as a counterpoint to
situations like this conversation, where the subject is 'state of the
world' but the talk often slips to highly local issues located
somewhere between Austin and Hollywood Hills. How curious! 

*The specific IS the universal, man!

You seem to
be saying, beware, the Internet is the world is the crazy great
different place about the existence of which one might forget!!! Is
that it, do you feel Internauts in the US need to be reminded that
there are great, crazy, popular things going and they nevertheless
have no
idea that they exist?

*OF COURSE I want to tell people about crap they never
heard of before! I'm a science fiction writer, I'm not some
*&*^$%% televangelist!

But what interests me the most is you and Eastern Europe. What's your
take on the region? 

*"Transition To Nowhere."

I notice you spend a lot of time in the Balkans,
which to me are a mix of Yugonostalgia, war craziness and new
media savvy. They are so lucky, with all their media centers. 

*And those war criminals and the cruise missile damage,
man, who couldn't envy 'em?

And the
further North you go, the less of them you see, and once you get to
Poland

*Been there.

things in the 'getting the new media' category start to look
quite bleak. And then there's the Baltic and you have to stop. 

*One word: "E-Stonia."

We're the country with the most expensive telephone and internet
connection
prices in Europe, maybe even in the world? So I'd like to know what's
your
take on the Balkan affinity with the new media. Smart people say
Poland is
so big, agricultural, catholic and traditional that the situation is
quite hopeless. It's hard for us to learn from places like the US, but
maybe
there's a lesson to be learnt closer, in the Balkans?

*Just jail some mafiosi and keep your birth rate up!
You'll pull through! Just thank the Pope's God that
you're not Russia, Ukraine or Belarus!

And then there's the environment. Would you agree that that's an even
more hopeless issue to deal with in Eastern Europe? What is the right
style, do you have a bag of tricks for preaching Viridianism in
Eastern Europe?

*Stay tuned...
  

