inkwell.vue.204 : The 2004 Bruce Sterling State of the World Address
## 0 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 04 14:31

    
This is our latest "state of the world, the future, and everything" annual
discussion with author Bruce Sterling, whose latest science fiction novel,
The Zenith Angle, is due in late spring from Del Rey.  Bruce is also known
for his journalism (e.g. his monthly column for Wired Magazine), futurism,
and culture hacks (the Dead Media Project and the Viridian Design
Movement). He's also a public speaker and world traveler.  Leading the
discussion: Jon Lebkowsky, a technoculture-focused writer, activist, and
consultant who, like Bruce, spends most of his time in Austin, Texas.
  
## 1 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 04 14:35

    
2003 was a crazy year leaving so many issues on the table, I'm not quite 
sure where to start. From your latest Viridian note, I see that you're 
thinking about attention conservation vs increasing loads of spam... is 
that a good place to start? Should we scale the war on terrorism to include 
spammers?
  
## 2 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 1 Jan 04 15:21

    
It was a crazy year.  Very.  I'm glad to have survived it.

I don't believe in "War on Terror," but there's definitely
a titanic struggle going on.  One side, the New World Order
side, has a capacity to wage war, so that's what they do,
even  though that's not one of their best moves.   The
other side is the New World Disorder, and they're
too disordered to throw any real wars, so they commit
mayhem on the tribal and individual level.  An individual
wrapped in a belt-bomb, that's their cruise missile.
Their great hope is that War creates more Terror and
not less.  It certainly worked for them in Chechnya
and Afghanistan.

The two worlds interpenetrate.  They even breed
one another.  It's very striking to dismantle one's
anti-spam armor and just look at the face of the Internet
these days.  This center of the high-tech
realm  is fantastically corrupt. There is most
every variety of mayhem represented there.  I haven't been urged
to strap on a belt-bomb yet (probably because I can't
read Arabic), but I get pitches for drugs, human trafficking,
oceans of porn, kidporn, 419 scams by the thousands, great
blooms of viruses...  And it's not somewhere "Out There,"
beyond the walls and scanners of Homeland Security;
this stuff is *in the homeland,* brother, it goes
wherever my laptop goes.
  
## 3 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 04 15:48

    
I chuckled at the thought that the U.S. Congress figured it could stop 
spam. Waiting to see how that plays out. I used to say, vote with your 
delete key, but my delete key wore out.
  
## 4 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 1 Jan 04 19:36

    

I don't believe that the almighty majesty of the US Congress
is enough to stop globalized spam, but I  also don't believe that the
forces
of civilization are helpless before bandits.  That is a counsel
of despair.  Once you believe that legitimated government
is mere empty posturing, you will end up in living
in a Russian-style mafia kakistocracy.  And you will
deserve that.

Spammers are not monsters ten feet tall.  Spammers are vermin.
If we all looked, acted, thought and behaved as badly as
spammers do, our world would be reduced to desperate penury. 

Spammers are parasites.  They contribute nothing to the
general welfare.  Spammers couldn't trust each other with
five bucks to walk down to the corner grocery and bring 
back a loaf of bread.  They are wicked and malicious
and they should be brought to justice.

The day when the delete key still ruled, well, these
cool clean technocratic days are over on the Net.  Microsoft might
patch some security holes here and there, but there are
no technical solutions to semantic frauds like
phishing.  The Internet has become a massive, worldwide medium.
It has become a global arena of massive popular struggle,
It's Chinese Indian American Brazilian European, the world wide works,
and it reflects our own faults and deficits with cruel accuracy.
When we look at the Net these days, we are staring
straight into the portrait of Dorian Gray.  

That's no longer the vector-graphic portrait of DARPA and
Bolt Beranek and Newman in the 89-column screen there. That
is the portrait of mankind, warts and all.  We are gonna see the face
in
there that we deserve.

We deserve better than this. People of goodwill need
to work toward that end, no matter what anybody's Congress
may attempt to say or do.
  
## 5 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 1 Jan 04 21:41

    
Any ideas for 'working toward that end?' Like stuff you're doing, 
personally, that others might consider?
  
## 6 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 04 10:32

    
Well, it's easy to think that Big Wide World has got too much
going on compared to tiny little me, me, me, but
that's a fallacy.  if there are 7 billion people in the world
then you should feel just fine about it if you are doing
one seven-billionth of the work.

Probably the single thing I do personally that reduces the
crude havoc on the Internet is avoiding the Windows OS.
Use a Mac, for heaven's sake.  Stop adding to the
pollution of viruses, and stop offering slave machines
that spew spam for others.

Even Microsoft itself can't keep up with their own patches.
Why should you have to do all that labor?
Just step off that treadmill there and buy
a different machine that isn't easy prey
to every cybercrook around.  This offers the considerable benefit
that you don't have to act all conscientious about it 
all the time.  Bad design isn't your fault, but
it's your fault if you buy bad design, knowing
that it's bad.  And it is.

This is the skinny here, if you're all into tech-speak:
http://www.theregister.co.uk/content/55/34554.html

Complaining to the cops about crime is generally
a good idea.  Of course, they don't solve all the crimes,
but when they hear enough from the constituency
they reassign some personnel.

The Internet Crime Complaint Center:
http://www.ic3.gov/

In a lot of places on the planet, the cops
are also  the criminals.  if that's the case
then you should complain to "Transparency
International."  And good luck surviving.
http://www.transparency.org/

SpamAssassin here on the Well seems to
be doing a pretty good job for me, and
I also have  a spam label in my Mail program.
But that isn't going to stop the more
sophisticated spoofs and semantic hacks,
which I expect to be the big coming
thing in spamdom.  

It's an inherent
part of the problems of globalization,
that capital moves faster than institutions can.
This includes criminal capital of course.
We've reached a situation where any
nation-state that breaks becomes a
criminal haven, a narcoterror racket,
a money laundry, and a redlight district.
That's why we're chasing our own shadow
in a War on Terror.  We're gonna continue
chasing it until we get some kind of global
civil society happening.

I don't know how we do that, but that's
the challenge of the current epoch.
It's not a problem that's insoluble.
It's good to have challenges, they
get us out of bed in the morning.
  
## 7 of 131: Andrew Alden (alden) Fri 2 Jan 04 10:58

    
Looking forward to a great discussion here! As for me, I'd like to do one
SIX-billionth of the work if I could, to make up for some of those who can't
or won't act.
  
## 8 of 131: Berliner (captward) Fri 2 Jan 04 11:14

    
Actually, though, it'd be a bit more than that. No sense trying to
make an infant in Baluchistan shoulder a fraction.
  
## 9 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 04 11:43

    
The Internet seems to be transitional at the moment. We're at a point where 
whole countries and very heavy commercial interests want to tweak the 
system to fit their biases. Media industries see their control of 
distribution mechanisms challenged by network-savvy kids building p2p 
networks faster than the RIAA/MPAA can slam 'em down. What's the future of 
the relatively dumb network that has served us so well?
  
## 10 of 131: Brian Dear (brian) Fri 2 Jan 04 12:38

    <scribbled by brian Wed 20 Mar 13 18:15>
  
## 11 of 131: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Fri 2 Jan 04 13:45

    
The Net long relied on various forms of trust that now seem pretty
unreliable. Do you think there are ways to get back the trust, or do we
need trust workarounds?
  
## 12 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 2 Jan 04 14:43

    
My thinking on these issues has been affected by hanging
out with computer cops since the early 90s when I wrote
"Hacker Crackdown."  Cops are never really much afflicted
by the "trust" business.  You rarely see cops get all hurt
and down in the mouth because some trusted city solon
or universally admired Ken Lay business figure turns
out o be crooked.  They just consider that part of the human
condition.

Gail Thackeray once told me that 15 percent of the population
was impeccably honest and would rather starve than steal.
And fifteen percent would steal anything not nailed down.
And the cause of law enforcement was to establish an
atmosphere of deterrence that would win the hearts and
minds of the remaining 70 percent.

At the time, I found this alarmingly cynical, but as more
time passes I've come to take some comfort in it.  The
percentages may not move that much, but individual human
beings can move through those categories.  I've seen a whole
lot of people outgrow cracking; they just get over it.
The weed of crime bears bitter fruit.  People who are
sociopathic harm themselves in a lot of other ways,
they can't keep a marriage together, they can't sit still
in a room, they're addictive, itchy and compulsive; to
be a bad person in love with transgression is bad for you.
Societies where the 70 percent are thieves -- they can't
pave the roads, they can't cure the sick, they have
no future.

The Internet has always been "very transitional." Stuff
just booms and blooms and collapses in there, there
are vogues and rumors and moral panics.  I suspect
that the deep driving forces are social and ethnic and
civilizational now, it's no longer a matter of sort-of engineering
the hubs to be smarter or dumber, or sticking in spam
guards and security patches.  The driving forces are
things like vast batallions of Chinese and Indian software
engineers who are discovering that this stuff can be
bent to their own civilizational purposes.

In my new daily weblog I spend a lot of time just
looking over national boundaries.  This used to
be really tough.  Now it's just there: Google in
a dozen languages, translation software, reams
of stuff in servers all over Asia, Europe, Australia.
It's point-and-click globalization.
  
## 13 of 131: Theodore C Newcomb (nukem777) Fri 2 Jan 04 16:04

    
Bruce, do you think this is all just a transitional phase of new
technologies intersecting with globalization, as we come to see
ourselves as citizens of the world? Or do you think there may be new
divergent technologies on the horizon that will continue to change how
we communicate? Or both?

I guess what I'm thinking is that if the Net is what we are all going
to be using for the next 40 years or so as a primary method of
communication then it's up to us to educate ourselves accordingly.

 RFM has been the catch phrase ever since I began pointing and
clicking 10 years ago. But it seems as the various digital technologies
interconnect with the Internet, people want to know even less and less
as to how it works and how to work with it.
  
## 14 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 2 Jan 04 21:23

    
Hey, I googled RFM and got 578,000 hits; still not certain what you were 
referring to, nukem-san. Do you really get the impression that people want 
to know less about how this stuff works? I keep running into people who 
are just catching on, and want to know more... and more and more. 
Political consultants, especially. The Howard Dean campaign made the 
Internet real for them, and now they want to figure out how to replicate 
his success... not easy to do, because it's not just a set of practices 
you can adopt. Dean was successful because he was willing to defer some 
control, instead cultivating emergent support. Which brings me to another 
question, Bruce - some peple see the Internet as a platform for Democracy, 
where weblog technology enables whole communities of Thomas Paines writing 
virtual tracts. Is that your sense... that the Internet drives a kind of 
political renaissance?
  
## 15 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 3 Jan 04 07:39

    
I think Nukem is politely referring to the programmer
acronym "RTFM", meaning "read the fucking manual."
It's the commonest guru response when newbies are
hassling you to do their own homework for them.
RTFM and you'll be able to do that on your own.

In the case of the American polity, the manual is
supposed to be the Constitution.  It gets kinda
spooky when power-players in the USA decide
to no longer read it.  

I'm very interested indeed in smart-mobs, but
a mob isn't a democracy, no matter how much
hardware its members may be carrying or
how clever they get at deploying it.

Woodstock is unexpected, delightful and surprising,
because nobody expected it and there are huge
raw energies there.  Altamont comes to
grief.  It's like a principle.  

Burning Man doesn't come to grief, but 
Burning Man has a cabal of hardened, experienced cadres,
it only lasts three days, and it's swarming with cops.
Burning Man is organization disguised as licence.
If bikers started beating and knifing naked people
at Burning Man they'd be jumped on by 
Danger Rangers and Nevada cops with guns.

Burning Man is a party, not a city-state.

I'm gonna believe in the Internet as a true-blue "platform
for democracy" when a bunch of people go
start some new settlement, using the Internet
first, and then a town *grows up around that.*

It's like the apotheosis of the "smart house,"
which isn't a normal house with some wiring
and chips strung through it, but a place
specifically built to shelter the network.

A functional polity needs a social infrastructure.
Government requires things like separation of powers, balance
of powers, consent of the governed, rules
of order for debate.  It needs civility.  Its
institutions have to command public credibility.
It helps a lot if they've been around a while
and their workings are open and obvious.
The Internet has been around a while but
it's conspicuously lacking in those other things.

I'm glad that major candidates are understanding
that the web is around, and I'm all for Thomas Paine
getting a few sentiments off his chest.  Radio
used to have much the same political role, when it
was shiny new and sexy in the 1930s.
Radio is technology, not a political panacea.
Roosevelt was great at radio, but so were
Goebbels, Huey Long, Father Coughlin and
Mussolini.  Those particular struggles weren't
resolved by building better vacuum tubes.

Radio is still around, and we don't have
highly advanced, highly democratic radio now.
We've got awful radio.  
  
## 16 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 3 Jan 04 09:58

    
Radio technology is the basis for wireless data technologies, like the 
802.x evolving standards, and people like David P. Reed and Kevin Werbach 
are lobbying for more open spectrum. My understanding of the open spectrum 
arguments is that we could stop licensing spectrum and depend on smarter 
technologies, e.g. cognitive radio, to mitigate interference. I had these 
fantasies of radio like the web, where the barriers to entry are low, 
anyone can generate signal, and eventually we have thousands, even 
millions, of radio stations, just like we have thousands of blogs today. 
We could have Viridian radio broadcasting eco-design rants 24/7. Do you 
have room on your roof for a radio transmitter?
  
## 17 of 131: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 3 Jan 04 10:29

    
The thing I find kind of scary about the Internet is that it's not
going to be too long before you can't turn it off without becoming some
sort of survivalist kook.  Radio and TV have been around for decades
but you can easily do without them, plus the fact that there's so much
crappy radio and TV makes it not too hard to do.  But in a decade or
two, I could see it being damned difficult to pay your bills,
correspond with friends, find a job, do your job, or shop without an
Internet connection.

At the same time, there's this tremendous potential for wasting time,
just like TV, that's always one step away and you can't throw out.  And
the Internet hasn't yet reached its full addictive potential as a form
of entertainment yet.  It's going to be like having a slot machine in
every home, and at work, too.

And if enough talented people work at it hard enough and the business
model turns out right, it might be a slot machine with high artistic
and cultural merit and good production values.

So maybe if it all gets clogged up with spam, it's not the worst thing
in the world.
  
## 18 of 131: Berliner (captward) Sat 3 Jan 04 10:44

    
Seems to me if Bruce had an antenna on top of his house, he'd get a
visit. Weren't there a couple of low-watt FMers busted in Austin some
years ago?
  
## 19 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sat 3 Jan 04 10:51

    
Yes, I was being polite about the manuals, which I still don't believe
too many people are reading. I just switched to Linux and I'm
surrounded by manuals and links to all the user groups I could find so
that I can get started learning it.  From my experience I'm in the
minority.

I have friends who own their own small businesses and have virtually
no security to their computing networks because they don't want to
learn anything and just find it all too complicated. I think that's
probably the norm.

Jon, I'm not too taken with the Dean internet hype, even tho I've been
contributing. First of all we're only talking about 180,000 people.
That's really not much politically and not the swing group that will
make the final decision anyway.

Bruce, I agree with you about mobs and democracy.  I don't see the web
as providing any more than a means of communication and information. I
don't think any messiah's, political or otherwise, are going to be
coming out of the web.  Actually, just the opposite.  I think we are
moving toward the 'iconization' of sentiments and trends...ala William
Gibson's Idoru.
  
## 20 of 131: Theodore C Newcomb (nukem777) Sat 3 Jan 04 11:01

    
Re: spammers...Neilson/Net Ratings released a
survey,http://www.bigblueball.com/news2/article.asp?id=463, saying 75%
of connections to the Net are via IM's, media players, and P2P's...I
think that's probably the trend...away from e-mail. I'm looking for the
next improvement on the cellphone/PDA/web connection and that will
probably be about all I'll use communication wise. A home computer will
pretty much be for research, news and entertainment tied in to some
big screen replacing the TV.
  
## 21 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 3 Jan 04 14:06

    
I do have room on my roof for a radio transmitter, and 
I have New Year plans -- vague ones, but real  plans --
to have some commercial guys come in and
splash wi-fi all over my neighborhood from
a mast on my roof.  I was gonna offer it as
a free-rider thing, and then I thought -- y'know --
it's just a dead cinch that warchalking
spammers are gonna come park  vans
in my front yard.  I don't have time and energy
to keep these predators at bay from people
I am trying to help.   So let a commercial
service do it, and pull some money out of the
system in order to keep the infrastructure on
the up-and-up.  It's less of a menace to 
civilization that way.

I wouldn't mind becoming a home-DJ and
doing some kind of round-the-clock
iPod spewing Internet music thing.
I've been checking that out on iTunes,
and boy is that stuff weak.  There ought
to be an Internet radio channel that is
amazingly, mind-blowingly keen-o,
the very voice of musical liberation,
but if so, I've yet to find it.  It has
the soporific qualities of cable access,
only more so.

One is tempted
to just boldly dash out there and cut
those zombies at ClearChannel a new one,
but, well, hobbies like that have the bad
habit of becoming massive attention hogs.
Even assuming, of course, that armed RIAA
agents didn't come to kick my door down.

I'm never going to run a propaganda station.
When it comes to my own rantings,
I draw the line at forcing them on people
without some kind of warning.
  
## 22 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Sat 3 Jan 04 15:17

    
Very poetic!
  
## 23 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 4 Jan 04 00:10

    
You've been focusing on 'new world disorder' for years, and we've billed 
this as a 'state of the world' discussion, so we should talk about this 
latest war - not so much Iraq, I think that's just a battle in a larger 
war, which is probably best characterized as the U.S. "New American 
Century" neoconservatives vs the rest of the world. Did you see this 
coming?
  
## 24 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 4 Jan 04 09:34

    

Well, it didn't take genius to see that the Bush clan
had it in for the Tikritis.  As soon as they hauled
Saddam out by the scruff of the neck, everybody goes
"whoo" as if it were all over now.  Because everybody
had it figured that the UN resolutions, the tons
of nerve gas, the human rights blither, that was
all pretext.

"He tried to kill my Dad," you know.  Al Qaeda
is more sophisticated than people let on, while
American power centers seethe with tribal rage.

It there was a shock about this, it was the
way the Disorder revealed itself *inside Washington.*
A raid by mountain bandits on the World Trade Center
really was a kind of PR genius, but I don't think
anybody, including the neocons, really got it that
the US Administration would be willing to cut all the
barbed wire, ride hell for leather and try to settle every
issue on the planet  with a vigilante shotgun.

The neocons are okay with that, though.  They
see themselves as heroic rebels against a
choking global orthodoxy, a small but
divinely inspired elite who will bend the
world their way if they can just hold on long
enough for truth to prevail.  The Disorder
always thrives on these sentiments; they've very
Serbian, very Afghan, very US Confederacy, too.
Women in the Balkans really love "Gone with the Wind."
There's a kind of cult for it. If Croats and Serbians
lived in America they'd live in some of those pro-Bush
Red States.
http://observer.guardian.co.uk/magazine/story/0,11913,1115505,00.html

"I won't think about occupying Baghdad today;
I'll think about it tomorrow." Very Scarlett O'Hara, that.
(Rhett Butler works for Enron and  Halliburton.)

As Cavour once put it, "you can do anything with bayonets
except sit on them."  So there's not gonna be a lot
of "major combat operations", but there's gonna
be a whole lot of nationalist intifada. 

There's a fractal quality to it, it's a nested series
of Venn diagrams. The American neocons are a
nationalist intifada.  The Disorder and the Order
interpenetrate, the Lexus is parked under the Olive Tree,
and McWorld is where the children of the Jihad eat.
  
## 25 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sun 4 Jan 04 10:01

    
"The Disorder and the Order
interpenetrate, the Lexus is parked under the Olive Tree,
and McWorld is where the children of the Jihad eat."

Now that's poetry. Well put, both sides feed off one another. More to
the point, they need one another to keep their agendas going.

What about the rest of the world though? Don't you find it strange
that here we are at a point in history where there is one dominant
superpower that could take a giant leap forward for civilization on the
planet and instead chooses to revert to form? 

Well, I guess that doesn't surprise me so much. But I am surprised
that the rest of the world seems to be sitting back and taking it. And
I would have hoped that whatever forces of civilization are being
formed and/or unleashed by and on the Internet would spring forth. But
I'm not sensing much of that either. Am I missing something or hoping 
for too much too soon? 
  
## 26 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Sun 4 Jan 04 10:48

    
You're confusing big talk on the Internet with will, purpose and
stamina. :-)
  
## 27 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sun 4 Jan 04 10:55

    
I guess.  But if the Dean blog is proving anything, and I'm not sure
that it is -- Iowa and New Hampshire will tell if there is anything
real behind the supposed momentum -- then there is some hope for some
consensus of will, etc that might be formed on the Net. 

I think what I'm getting at is whether or not the Net can provide that
kind of forum; if there is a new potential for electronic town halls,
etc. 
  
## 28 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Sun 4 Jan 04 10:59

    
It's like the One Ring -- it gives power according the stature.

The probelm with American democracy isn't the channels of expression:
the democracy throve when men rode horses for days through the spring
mud to make stump speeches.

No, it's the ease and comfort and jealous guardianship of wealth and
world empire that's killing democracy. "Luxury lies upon us like
a vampire / Avenging the captive nations we brought to heel" said
Juvenal 1900 years ago in Imperial Rome.
  
## 29 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 4 Jan 04 17:05

    
My recollection is that the One Ring assigns power to any entity (with
opposable thumbs and a ring finger) that happens to possess it. What 
varies is tolerance: power corrupts the flesh and, where the flesh is 
weak, power destroys it.

So who is Sauron in today's world? And who is Frodo?  
  
## 30 of 131: The Fucked-Up Piano Chicks (magdalen) Sun 4 Jan 04 17:31

    

and where are the hot elf babes?
  
## 31 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sun 4 Jan 04 19:05

    
Flashback to Bookpeople a few months ago, you're plugging your new book and
comparing the eminent invasion of Iraq to the Chechnyan ordeal.  And you
were making projections.  How have those projections been shaping up and how
has the Iraq War progressing vis a vis your prediction of that event?

Who will win the Presidential election this year?

Who will the Dems nominate?  Who should they nominate?

What's going to be the deciding factor in the Presidential campaign this
year?  (akin to "it's the economy stupid")
  
## 32 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 4 Jan 04 21:08

    
Flashback to Bookpeople a few months ago, you're plugging your new
book and
comparing the eminent invasion of Iraq to the Chechnyan ordeal.  And
you
were making projections.  How have those projections been shaping up
and how
has the Iraq War progressing vis a vis your prediction of that event?

*The Iraqis aren't fighting anywhere near so hard as the Chechnyans.

Here are my musings from two years ago.

From: Bruce Sterling 
Date: 9.21.01 

In addressing the question of "What Now?" I want to speculate freely
on what might happen on a large scale in the near term. Here are some
rough scenarios, with my even vaguer estimate of their likelihood. 

A. Aum Shinry Kyo II. The malefactors of September 11 are rounded up
with little effort, because they are not genuine provocateurs of a
Clash of Civilizations; they are merely nuts. Only distantly connected
to any serious revolutionary terrorist, they are in fact an obscure
splinter cult who are mostly dead at their own hands. The suffering of
New York City is seen in retrospect, not as a grand battle over any
principle worth fighting for, but as a simple aberration that is both
tragic and crazy, a loathsome, Jonestown-like phenomenon. No particular
lessons are learned, very little changes in the global scene, but
there's a lasting blow to general morale and to humanity's assessment
of itself. Society is saddened and sickened, and people around the
world are often seen to hesitate before setting foot in a subway or
airliner. Probability: 15% 

B. Gulf War III. After a great deal of angst and sword-sharpening,
there's a quick, surprising Coalition victory. Those who promised a
ruthless struggle to the death in the Mother of All Battles are
revealed as blowhards. Suicide bombing cells turn out to be careless
and unprofessional terrorists, who are easily rounded up by street-wise
cops. Americans and allies go back to their barracks, leaving a few
extra Southwest Asian bases to keep guard on the troublemakers. A
war-leader President with the gratitude of a relieved nation loses his
re-election due to economic troubles.
Probability: 25% 

C. Cold War II. A sustained ideological and economic struggle sets in
between the G-8 and the world's poorest and bitterest countries. There
are numerous hot-war flare-ups, much narco-terror, a great deal of
ruthless, paramilitary spy skullduggery, and considerable civil dissent
from dissidents in the West unable to morally stomach this grinding,
Balkan-style dirty war. McCarthyism and witch-hunts flare up, while the
sentiment of "Viva Osama" moves to a simmering Central America. There
is huge, inflationary spending on imaginary, symbolic, and unusable
super-weapons. The general American population is put under a level of
police surveillance previously available only to American black people.
This grinds on for decades, with America gamely bearing-any-burden, on
until the opposition loses all heart and begins drinking itself to
death. Probability: 15% 

D (1). Pearl Harbor Straight to Bretton Woods. Since there really is
no military enemy to fight — a few nasty guys with boxcutters — there
is a general economic and diplomatic rearrangement, without WWII's ugly
bother of bombing and sacking whole continents. The original enemy — a
rather vaporous notion of "terrorism" — is quickly lost sight of in a
general, very wide-scale, geopolitical emergence into 21st century
Modernity. This global New Deal moves Russia, China, Cuba, Vietnam and
other longterm pariahs into the "Civilized" camp, while the broken
nations that are today considered basket-cases are made into
blue-helmet protectorates. The Second World vanishes. From now on,
there's just two sides: Real People, and some pariahs. 

Among the Real People, there is a great deal of general housecleaning:
currency reforms, arms reduction, climate treaties, economic
rationalization, demolition of trade barriers, labor laws, emigration,
all that sort of thing. Everybody else — The People Without Plumbing,
basically — have to live off a combination of empty threats and
emergency handouts. 

Oddly, the one major power least likely to join the Real People is
probably the United States, but the USA may have a grudging unilateral
role as a kind of Third Way or Loyal Opposition. 

D (2) . 1989 Redux. Upset and alarmed by the unnecessary global mayhem
so cynically triggering by madmen, civil society takes to the streets
worldwide in a touching display of aspiration and political maturity.
Democratization sweeps the Moslem world in a second wave of Velvet
Revolution. A grateful mankind sees the martyrs of New York as the
unwitting harbingers of a better and kinder way of life, which is full
of caring, solidarity, human rights and social justice. This scenario
is basically the same as D(1), but seen from the other side of the WTO
fence and the Genoa barriers. Since Al Qaeda can't distinguish a
Western radical from a Western capitalist, they are both in the same
boat now and can henceforth work in tandem.
Probability: 20% 

E. Greater Afghanistan. The Coalition suffers an outright military
defeat at the hands of indomitable armed peasants, in a ruthless,
bloody, punjee-stick dirty war, possibly combined with an
unconventional use of weapons of mass destruction. NYC 9.11 turns out
to be just the first of a series of bloody Tamerlane-style attacks from
a growing and increasingly frenzied horde of enemies of the West.
Nerve-shattered, the West takes the last copter from the Saudi embassy
and sues for peace. 

This Qaeda victory scenario has a number of variants, which could
exist singly or in combination. 

E1. The Empire Formerly Known As NATO. The US bears the blunt of blame
for its clumsy handling of the global conflict, which relied so
fatally on the so-called strength of America's arrogant and untenable
free-market ideology. The defeated Alliance splits up much like its
former mirror image, the Warsaw Pact. Without Persian Gulf oil, the
American economy and its war machine both collapse. Severe discord and
disillusionment ensues, with crime and corruption skyrocketing.
Desperate Russian women leave the streets of every capital in the world
and are replaced by desperate American women. 

E2(A). The Great Terror. A victory by fanatics careless of life
becomes a giant Khmer Rouge-style death machine for Islam; the Aztec
charisma of a Qaeda cult requires ever-greater human sacrifice,
especially of one's own. A 12th-century lifestyle can only sustain a
12th-century population. 

E2(B). A Grand Caliphate. With malignant American and Jewish influence
finally scorched from the holy lands of the Umma, a new Golden Age of
just and tolerant Universal Islam ensues. It's ruled by Sharia law,
under a wise and merciful Caliph who re-unites Sunni and Shi'a and
outshines Haroun Al Rashid. A grateful mankind erects many grand and
glorious mosques in memory of the warrior saints of Islamic
fundamentalism; men whose tactics were rather rough, but in the eyes of
history, fully justified. Combined probability of any of the E
variants: 10% 

F. America Goes Bonkers. The globe's worst fears of a paranoid "Cowboy
America" come true, as further terror provocations decapitate the
American nation. A ferocious nuclear power, eyeballs gone rigid with a
crazed lust for vengeance, launches a massive thermonuclear lynching
spree. Probability: 2 % 

G. Many More Wild Cards. This is neither an "age of terror" nor an
"age of freedom". This is an age of random calamities. It's a genuine
end of history, in which the passage of time in human affairs no longer
has any rules as we previously understood them. There is no great
historical narrative at hand, nor is there any grand scheme by which a
rational analyst can make useful sense of events. NYC 9.11 is quickly
eclipsed by other, biggest factors even more untoward and shocking:
perhaps dumber acts of terror by even smaller groups, plus some
Greenhouse calamities, an asteroid strike, some brand-new plagues, or
even free beer and five cent nano-genetic intelligent cigars. Humankind
has lost all control of our destiny and nothing can restore it.
Probability: 3% 

H. None of the Above.
Probability: 10 

******************************************************

*At the moment we seem to be muddling along somewhere between
"B" and "C."  "D(2)" would now be officially dignified with the term
"the Brasilia Consensus", but it remains to be seen if it can get
any traction.

http://www.iht.com/articles/122604.html


Who will win the Presidential election this year?

*If bin Laden is still alive, that's pretty much his decision.
We Americans have never before forfeited so much
initiative to an enemy.

Who will the Dems nominate?  Who should they nominate?

*I'd suggest nominating a competent technocrat who
can actually govern a major power, but when one
looks across the political landscape there is just
not a lot of depth of talent in anybody's politics anywhere.
That would include not just the USA but Britain,
Germany, Italy, France, Japan, and maybe Canada.
The only political figure I see with serious stature
right now is Lula from Brazil, and he's from Brazil,
for heaven's sake.

*The entire planet is politically weak.  We're really
at sixes and sevens.  It's amazing that a blatant
suicide cult like Al Qaeda has been able to push
us all around for years on end now.  We didn't used
to flinch that way when we were facing the
Soviet Union, a superpower run by Stalin
and bristling with atom bombs.  If we had any
idea of what we wanted and how to get there,
their grotesque parody of visionary glamor would
have faded long ago.  We have a "dream gap" with
the Mujihadeen because our own politics are so
blatantly vapid.

What's going to be the deciding factor in the Presidential campaign
this
year?  (akin to "it's the economy stupid")

*I don't think the American political establishment
has enough initiative to supply its own deciding factors.
If the Special Forces manage to drag bin Laden out of
a rathole, that could do it right there.  Alternatively,
if the Moodge get lucky on their third attempt and
kill Musharraf, we could see a major-league
Pakistani bloodbath that would be so weird,
scary and freaky that everything done since 9/11
would seem sort of childishly misguided and irrelevant.

Or the dollar could implode, or there could
be the mother of all Enron - Parmalat scandals, or
SARS could re-emerge and eat everybody's lunch,
or there could be the long-expected scandalous eruption
of Iran-Contra II, "Iran-Neocontra."  Somebody
could offer the President a blowjob and the
Republic would fall straight to its knees.

I wouldn't be surprised if the political landscape
on election day has as little resemblance to today
as September 12 2000 had with September 12 2001.
  
## 33 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sun 4 Jan 04 21:42

    
I see you don't share the commonly held love affair with Dean or Austin's
latest darling, Kucinich (Willie even wrote a song for him).  These guys
don't shake your tree?
  
## 34 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 04 02:03

    
Maybe this is relevant:

http://www.bopnews.com/archives/000124.html#000124

"And this is the final failure of the long string in Traub's article - he
sees what people who sit in the media bubble think of as America - an
American that is a herd of consumers to be pushed towards which ever image
a small group selects. Who sees politics as a sport - in that it is
decided by a few megamillionaires making inside decisions about which team
it recruits - and that the involvement of the public is limited to buying
tickets, worshipping quarterbacks, and cheering or jeering. 

"And this change, of citizen-participants, willing to follow arguments in
full about the manner and direction of American policy - away from
consumer-voters who care more about how someone looks in a flight suit -
is backed by hard data. The decline of the nightly network news into a
side show demonstrates it - it is the small cable news shows which drive
discussion now, with running commentaries on Meet The Press, Hardball,
Crossfire and Washington Week in Review occuring on forums with thousands
of readers - who then turn and take the impressions they form with their
electronic coffee house companions out as conventional wisdom. Watching
the rating of the big three news programs plunge from virtually every
house with a television set, to less that a fifth of the population should
tell people what they need to know about the decline of image bite, sound
bite and thought bite politics. The mass image still pushes the buttons of
those who follow it, as the "chopped down Christmas tree" that pollkatz
follows, and which bopnews looked at in Post Pop. There is a shock from an
image, and a pop, but the net of conversation and reinforcement that turns
the perception into an immovable factoid isn't there any more. Bush gets a
bounce, but not a boost."

-- Stirling Newberry
  
## 35 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 04 02:04

    
While I'm thinking of it: nonmembers of the WELL who are reading this 
interview and have questions or comments can send them to 
inkwell-hosts at well.com, and they'll be posted here.
  
## 36 of 131: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Mon 5 Jan 04 10:06

    
And here's one now:



Bruce,

How do you see the near-future of energy politics shaping up? The USA 
just parked tanks on a third of the middle east's oil, but now we've 
got to pay the price for actually extracting it. Do you think at some 
point energy independence for the USA is going to make it into 
political consciousness? And if so, from the right or the left wing?

Vinay Gupta
  
## 37 of 131: from MICHAEL SEMER (tnf) Mon 5 Jan 04 12:41

    


Michael Semer writes:


Is it utterly cynical of me to wonder if the American
"petrocracy's" aims aren't being better suited by
dragging out the "hunt" for Osama until we've secured
all the aims laid out in the Neocons' infamous "Next
American Century" precis?

I'm afraid I can't buy any hooey from the White House
about how we've suddenly become evangelizers for
democracy.  The underlay here is strategic and
capitalistic, and Al Qaeda provides a convenient enemy
at exactly the right moment for the Wolfowitzes of the
world.  Methinks there's a moment of clarity for Osama
and the boys when they see an Iraq or Afghanistan
semihegemonized, rock back, whack their foreheads and
declare, "Crap!  I can't believe we fell for it!"
  
## 38 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Mon 5 Jan 04 13:06

    
Well, he may be making the same mistake Bill Clinton did in
thinking the White House really runs things all the time. By
contrast, listen to Bush himself as he struggles to change
the course of the ship of state.

This from
http://www.boston.com/news/nation/washington/articles/2003/11/07/bush_urges_mideast_to_accept_democracy/

...

In an unusually candid assessment of Mideast policy by a US president,
Bush said decades of support by Washington and its allies of
nondemocratic regimes in the region did not work, but that the United
States had now adopted a "forward strategy of freedom in the Middle
East."

"Sixty years of Western nations excusing and accommodating the lack of
freedom in the Middle East did nothing to make us safe, because in the
long run, stability cannot be purchased at the expense of liberty,"
Bush said in a speech to the National Endowment for Democracy, a
federally funded group that promotes democratic efforts worldwide.

...

So there are wheels within wheels. I'm not saying that the policies
adopted are necessarily likely to bring about the desired goals, but
there's apparently some real thinking going on, even inside the
president's cranium.
  
## 39 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Mon 5 Jan 04 13:09

    
I'll third that.  If we hadn't run out of money, I'm thinking we'd be
in Syria right now. 

It does look like Pakistan is the real problem, with very little focus
going on there. Any thoughts as to how that may play out?
  
## 40 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Mon 5 Jan 04 16:37

    
When's your next Bookpeople gig?
  
## 41 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 04 18:54

    

Bruce,

How do you see the near-future of energy politics shaping up?

*It doesn't look good.  I would predict continuing
domestic troubles with blackouts and price spikes.
The worst problem is that the near-future of
energy policy was Enron's for the asking, and with
them gone there's nobody left but morons, hucksters
and terrorists.  Enron was no good either!
It's like watching a brothel on fire.

*It's just bound to dawn on people eventually
that oil ruins every government it dominates.
It doesn't matter what race, color or creed you
are, if you put oil people in power they grab
the wellhead, surround it with bayonets and
watch society wither.

*Iraq is just the poster-boy for that.  Venezuela,
Nigeria, Russia, Iran, Saudi Arabia, they all
suffer the curse of oil.  Norway is the 
exception to the rule.  The USA used to do okay,
but as soon as they put oil people in power
they went for the throats of the nearest
available enemy oil clan.  If you think of
the USA as behaving like an average oil-state
right now their behavior makes perfect sense.


 The USA 
just parked tanks on a third of the middle east's oil, but now we've 
got to pay the price for actually extracting it. Do you think at some 
point energy independence for the USA is going to make it into 
political consciousness?

*No, I think this kind of Gandhian economic nationalism
makes no sense.  Energy is always a patchy resource,
and if you live next to Quebec, what's the big deal?
Buy some of their hydropower and sell them maple
syrup or something.

*Personally I buy a lot of Texan wind power,
but it's generated by Danish windmills.

And if so, from the right or the left wing?

*It distresses me to see "right wing energy"
and "left wing energy."  There are people around
who will tear off solar panels because they
were put up by lefties in Birkenstocks.  This
is craziness.  Lenin didn't have a patent on
sunlight.  It's too important an issue for
this kind of Coke-Pepsi partisanship.


Michael Semer writes:


Is it utterly cynical of me to wonder if the American
"petrocracy's" aims aren't being better suited by
dragging out the "hunt" for Osama until we've secured
all the aims laid out in the Neocons' infamous "Next
American Century" precis?

*Yes, that is utterly cynical.  Osama isn't
somebody's pet scorpion.  He tried to put a
plane-full of civilians straight into the White
House.  He attacked the Pentagon and knocked
down two skyscrapers.  He's trying to kill
Musharraf and blow up the Indian Parliament.
You can't trifle with a guy like that for
some kind of piddling domestic advantage.
It's senseless.

*The Iraqi mujihadeen (or whoever they were)
almost killed Wolfowitz with a rocket attack.
I can't imagine that Wolfowitz gets up in
the morning, dusts off his hands and says,
"Oh yeah, gotta fit my pal Ozzie into the
PNAC blueprint here."  

*If the neocons bring Osama's severed head in on a pike
and throw it in front of the cameras of
Al Jazeera, the "New American Century"
is gonna have a boost like nobody's business.


"Sixty years of Western nations excusing and accommodating the lack of
freedom in the Middle East did nothing to make us safe, because in the
long run, stability cannot be purchased at the expense of liberty,"
Bush said in a speech to the National Endowment for Democracy, a
federally funded group that promotes democratic efforts worldwide.

*I agree that it's a little late in the day to come up
with a rational policy, but there's no WMD around, and that utter
vacancy in the common-wisdom is so vast and awful and
stunning that the government just has to say *something.*

*Iraq is not gonna be the last seriously disordered
place that is gonna require heavy-duty nation-building.
Call it "Imperialism" or call it what you want,
but huge areas of the planet are sliding right off
the map into septic narco-terror.  Afghanistan,
Chechnya, Congo, Somalia, these guys are living in
the Next Dark Age.  Colombia, Serbia, Argentina,
they're kind of trembling on the brink.  It's
kind of lame and dumb that the US is trying to 
civilize Iraq all by itself now, but if Iraq
turns into a giant flaming intifada, nobody's
gonna be any happier.  If the Order doesn't
figure out ways to at least keep the Disorder
running from place to place, we're gonna
be in a feudal age.

So there are wheels within wheels. I'm not saying that the policies
adopted are necessarily likely to bring about the desired goals, but
there's apparently some real thinking going on, even inside the
president's cranium.

*Hung for a lamb, hung for a sheep. If I were an
Iraqi, I'd want for the Yankees to spend all the 80
billion on bridges and power plants before
I chased them out.  What's the big hurry?
It's not like Americans are ever going to
actually govern Iraq -- they don't know
how to speak Arabic.


I'll third that.  If we hadn't run out of money, I'm thinking we'd be
in Syria right now. 

*We're not out of money.  If Iran makes nice
and Iraq somehow settles down to a dull roar,
Syria is in trouble.

It does look like Pakistan is the real problem, with very little focus
going on there. Any thoughts as to how that may play out?

*I have to say I'm a Pakistan pessimist.  They've failed
so badly in so many ways that I don't know how they
drag themselves out of the tailspin.

*This is kinda my favorite evidence here.  It's
a little dated, but look at India and then look
at that large dark spot next to it that is Pakistan.
Fifty years ago they were the same polity.
http://antwrp.gsfc.nasa.gov/apod/ap001127.html

*(Also check out North and South Korea.  Jeez!)
  
*Worse yet, Pakistan is so thickly populated and so huge
that the only power that could enforce order there
is India.  Pakistan used to *be* India, of course.  They
would have stayed India except that they were
afraid that they would have all their throats cut.
It's been fifty years, and while formerly they merely
feared attacks, they've now provided India with five decades'
worth of *good reasons* to cut their throats.  

*The government running India now are people who are the direct heirs
of the guys who shot Mahatma Gandhi. They're tough, nuclear-armed,
grumpy, assertive characters, and they just couldn't
be more swaggeringly pleased with themselves, either.
http://www.magindia.com/multimedia/india151203.html

Oh lord a-mercy.


When's your next Bookpeople gig?

*I got a book out in April, we'll see if any
independent booksellers survive that long.
Or if me and my fans do.  The track record
looks promising, I'm hoping for the best there *8-/
  
## 42 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Mon 5 Jan 04 19:05

    
>>"Sixty years of Western nations excusing and accommodating the lack of
>> freedom in the Middle East did nothing to make us safe, because in the

> *I agree that it's a little late in the day to come up
> with a rational policy, but there's no WMD around, and that utter
> vacancy in the common-wisdom is so vast and awful and
> stunning that the government just has to say *something.*

Bruce, with all due respect, that's the "we wept to you and you did
not mourn, we piped to you and you did not dance" fallacy first
described in the Bible :-) You're saying, in effect, that what Bush
said in this instance makes sense only because he's wrong all the
time!

I would, rather, ascribe it, you should pardon another biblical
allusion, to the seven-headed beast nature of government. That is, the
president could grow much sadder and wiser without policy getting much
saner, it's a hard tiger to ride.

I think G. W. Bush, whatever the general limits of his intellect, does
grasp the essential problem: we made this bed we're sleeping in. The
road from the 1953 overthrow of Mohammed Mossadegh to 9/11 is fairly
easily mapped. It's deucedly hard to miss, no matter what your
persuasion.
  
## 43 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 04 07:47

    
Even a stopped clock is right twice a day, Jax.
  
## 44 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Tue 6 Jan 04 08:14

    
Did you watch Battlestar Galactica (the "revisioned version")?  If you did,
what is the probability of the scenario they depict?  And how do you feel
about Austin movie theaters losing low wattage bulbs in their projectors?
  
## 45 of 131: from LLOYD ARNOLD (tnf) Tue 6 Jan 04 09:12

    




Lloyd Arnold writes:



On the subject of the path of the USA presidential campaign: These are
always governed by little hot button issues, rarely are important issues
addressed. Examples would include Willie Horton, pledging allegiance to the
flag, quotas, did he inhale?, did the first Bush have an affair?. For the
campaign of 2004, the media can be easily led by two subjects, same sex
marriage and partial birth abortion.

The president was surprisingly candid, when he said that dealing with non
democracies had not made the USA safer. But so what? When he needed staging
areas for the invasion of Iraq, he made deals with wacko dictators in
formerly Soviet central Asia.
  
## 46 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Tue 6 Jan 04 09:47

    
How's your Austin stock faring?  Are you high or low on our city?  Why are
some folks barrelling out of town for greener pastures?  What is going to
happen to the tech scene and arts scene?  Are you going to ride it out?
  
## 47 of 131: Uncle Jax, the Nicest Asshole on the Well (jax) Tue 6 Jan 04 10:50

    
> The president was surprisingly candid, when he said that dealing
> with non democracies had not made the USA safer. But so what? When
> he needed staging areas for the invasion of Iraq, he made deals with
> wacko dictators in formerly Soviet central Asia.

Mr. Arnold's comment is more to the point than Bruce's dismissive
"stopped clock" remark. One can disdain the admin's policies without
underestimating that crew. It can be advanced that they are wrong, but
to pretend that they are stupid is self-deception only.

Well, Lloyd Arnold, "So what?" indeed. The question any president must
face is, how to translate his will and his perceptions into tangible
actions of the bureaucrosaurs? Like Clinton and "gays in the
military", he never really won that one, did he?

I think Bush, whom I do not greatly admire, is a better man than his
admin and than we credit him for. He responded to conservative
pressure to condemn Islam as a "failed religion" by attending Friday
services at a mosque and calling Islam a "religion of peace". Now
while the VP from Halliburton (Cheney) and the DefSec from the
Infernal Regions (Rummy) carve up Iraq's oil reserves, we hear Bush
recognizing the real problem.

As poor, frustrated Pres. Warren G. Harding once said, "In this town,
it ain't your enemies, it's your goddamned friends!"
  
## 48 of 131: from VINAY GUPTA (tnf) Tue 6 Jan 04 12:04

    



Vinay Gupta writes:




Small is Profitable

http://www.smallisprofitable.org/

 is a book by the Rocky Mountain Institute which addresses change-of-scale
and change-of-control in energy generation and distribution systems. Ditch
the national grid, use sensor-heavy portfolios of wind/solar and peak-demand-
reduction systems to provide, stuff like that. It's not a "green for green
sake" approach: it's a "green because it pays the bills" approach. Also a lot
of very interesting options theory on renewable resources as "bonds" in an
energy portfolio, because they're immune to fuel supply price fluctuations.

Something going on on the technological level - these are essentially post-
industrial models for energy generation and distribution. And they work.
Lovins is typically about 20 years ahead of the game (his stuff on nuclear
non-proliferation by **giving**away** conventional power generation systems
to places like North Korea and Pakistan now looks prescient), so let's assume
he's on the ball this time too, because, well, he probably is...

How do you see that playing out? Do you think there are interesting second
and third order effects for decentralized energy generation? Or will it be
like the internet - a little really significant change, and a very great deal
of empty crowing?
  
## 49 of 131: soul of a hacker but the brains of a busboy (mattrose) Tue 6 Jan 04 12:09

    
Sorry to butt in so late and nitpick, but as a non-american, I feel I must
point out two things.
1.  WWII did not start with Pearl Harbor, it started with the invasion of
Poland.
2.  Good luck trading Maple Syrup to Quebec.  They make more of it than all
of New England put together.  There's a reason the Maple Leaf is on our
flag, it's cause we got so many of 'em.
  
## 50 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 04 12:46

    
I'll shut up and let you answer those, Bruce. I can't beat that 
low-wattage-bulb question.
  
## 51 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Tue 6 Jan 04 14:00

    
The high tailing it out of town reference wasn't about your leaving for
Colorado.  You came back at least.  It was about a couple who hotfooted it
to Hot Springs, Arkansas.  Bruce, is Hot Springs the next Austin?
  
## 52 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 04 14:01

    
Austin has certainly got its financial problems these days,
but it has just declared itself the "Clean Energy Capital of the
World" and I'm pretty well determined to live in the
Clean Energy Capital of the World.  It certainly
beats trying to breathe downwind of the
Dirty Energy Capital of the World.

Distributed power is  a sexy idea and it's starting
to get  credibility with the big players. It used to
be a blue-sky notion and now it's showing up
at heavy-duty energy conferences.  Austin's
"Austin Energy" talks a lot about this.  They
hope they can invent or adapt some kind of fast, smart
utility software that knits together solar panels,
distant windmills, hydrogen fuel cells, biomass
burning, methane from landfills, plus
the inevitable legacy coal, oil, and gas and nuclear,
and still can supply clean dependable voltage
suitable for running Austin Internet routers
and chip fabs.  These industries are awful
picky about brownouts.

It's not the easy way to run a utility,
but it might well be the future way.

And if they can manage to do this, they
figure they can make  money
by selling that fast-response model to people whose
systems are backward, pre-digital and stuck-in-the-mud.

Small isn't necessarily beautiful by itself.
In India I used to see people powering themselves
with cow-dung patties and the branches hacked
off trees in city parks.  That's small and distributed,
but it was the opposite of beautiful, 
and they would have been a lot better off
with some fume-free household wiring and
and some nice, big, hefty, 5-megawatt
giant offshore windmills.

Windpower gets more efficient with the size
of the blade.  You'll never make a serious dent in
coal or nuclear with a bunch of tiny little
home-owner windmills.  You pretty well
need to truck in some of those grown-up
Danish jobbies with a fuselage the size
of a 707.  Why kid around?

No I did not watch "Battlestar Galactica."
As is well known, I consume practically
nothing these days but Bollywood movies.
  
## 53 of 131: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 6 Jan 04 15:10

    
Any Bollywood recommendations?
  
## 54 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Tue 6 Jan 04 15:41

    
Notice he sidestepped the question about dim theater projection bulbs?
  
## 55 of 131: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Tue 6 Jan 04 20:36

    
bruces watches at home

stuff with Kajol
  
## 56 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 04 22:25

    
That software point is worth pursuing: computers and software are 
facilitating the move to clean energy by enabling so many of the 
technologies as well as monitoring. There are also systems of energy 
credits (the Texas version being a model for other states and countries) 
that can be brokered on computer-driven exchanges. I recall a piece of 
fiction that ran in Coevolution Quarterly years ago, the only fiction I 
recall seeing in CQ, that was written by J.G. Ballard, and was about a 
clean energy sustainable future, a little on the post-apocalytic side, but 
not the dystopian cyberpunk future. Could this be a suitable path for 
speculative fiction, envisioning futures that are shaped by new sources of 
energy?
  
## 57 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 04 06:57

    
Kajol is in semi-official retirement at the moment,
but her husband Ajay Devgan sure has been a busy guy.

Because I watch them for sociological, trend-spotting
reasons, I tend to like Bollywood movies that are
either really unpopular or sort of ludicrously popular.
David Chute, who is my favorite Bollywood critic,
actually watches this stuff from a cinematic perspective.
I don't get excited by Bollywood cinema unless I
see them doing something seriously alien that 
I am just barely beginning to understand.

David Chute explains it all:
http://www.geocities.com/Tokyo/Island/3102/resume.htm

If you're into cyberpunk, this is your Bollywood movie.
"Qayamat -- City Under Threat."  A big hit in the
Turkey City SF Writers Workshop.
http://www.qayamatthefilm.com/

"The Hero: Love Story of a Spy" didn't do well
in the box office, but it's a kind of X-ray of
modernist Indian BJP patriotic  jingoism.
Features evil Pakistanis with WMD.  Thanks to
constant costume changes, Sunny Deol 
acts instead of mailing in his performance.
http://www.bbc.co.uk/asianlife/film/reviews/the_hero.shtml

Fans of Edward Said imperialist orientalism
should forget modern Bollywood and check
out the sob-worthy, sequin-spangled historical vehicle
that made Rekha the dark star of Indian cinema.
"Umrao Jaan."  
http://www.rediff.com/entertai/2003/may/17dinesh.htm
http://www.uiowa.edu/~incinema/umraojaan.html

This film is the "Citizen Kane" of the Bollywood
feudal-family epic -- "Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham."
It made a mint.  Top-notch tech skills by Karan Johar,
a loyal modern scion of the old industry.
http://www.rediff.com/search/k3g.htm

And if you're still hungry, check out this
Ram Gopal Varma epic of Mumbai gangster
corruption, "Company."  It may be Ajay Devgan's
best role -- he is genuinely scary in this.
http://www.planetbollywood.com/Film/Company/
  
## 58 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Wed 7 Jan 04 09:53

    
Bruce, nice interview in
Reason,http://www.reason.com/0401/fe.mg.cybergreen.shtml,
would you talk a bit about what you see re: our being on the verge of
post-humanity?
  
## 59 of 131: from DAVID DAVISSON (tnf) Wed 7 Jan 04 16:02

    



David Davisson writes:



Bruce - Like Keith Richards wondering who the
musicians he likes listen to, I've wondered what
websites you visit regularly. Magazines regularly
read? Authors you read?

Thanks!
dave

David Davisson
  
## 60 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 04 16:39

    
Bruce, nice interview in
Reason,http://www.reason.com/0401/fe.mg.cybergreen.shtml,
would you talk a bit about what you see re: our being on the verge of
post-humanity?

*I'm kinda inclined to think we'll ooze over the verge
without quite admitting it to ourselves.  But there's
a lust for posthumanity in contemporary society
that's been blatantly obvious for many years.
We want it real bad, it's just not quite technically
there yet.

*In peacetime it's in stuff like cosmetic surgery,
recreational neurochemistry and athletic performance 
enhancement.  Nowadays it's in harder stuff like this:

http://www.darpa.mil/dso/thrust/matdev/ehpa.htm

*Neurally-controlled military exoskeletons.

"To develop devices and machines that will increase the speed,
strength, and endurance of soldiers in combat environments."

*Okay, fine, but "combat environments" last only a few hours.
Consider the more general implications here.
What happens when Skeleton-boy there has been Robocopping
along in superhuman conditions every day for a two-year or
four-year tour of duty?  Will he want to go back
to civvy street and have sand kicked in his face?

You might start seeing civilian spinoffs of this
for the medical market, for quadriplegics, the aged,
and all of a sudden you're right in the middle of
William Gibson's "The Winter Market" (1986).

I've wondered what
websites you visit regularly.

*http://www.boingboing.net
http://www.worldchanging.org
http://del.icio.us/

Feedster, Technorati, Daypop, Blogdex.
Lots of others.

 Magazines regularly
read?

*I take about 50 these days, but I especially like
I.D., Metropolis, "Homeland Security Professional,"
and "Special Operations Technology."

*Plus F&SF, Asimov's and Interzone, of course.
Everyone should subscribe to those for the good
of the human race.

*Plus, I not only work for WIRED, I read it.

 Authors you read?

*I try to read foreign ones nobody's ever heard of.
Like, say, Dubravka Ugresic's THE MUSEUM OF
UNCONDITIONAL SURRENDER.  It's not the sort
of thing I would ever force on anybody, but it
kept me turning pages. 
  
## 61 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 04 19:28

    
I'm staring at the recent photos from Mars, and wondering if we'll ever 
get the the Star Trek vision of space colonization. Those of us who've 
read megatons of science fiction are conditioned to expect interplanetary 
travel, pacts with aliens, hops across the galaxy via space warps. Given 
the state of things, you have to wonder if we'll do more than burn out, as 
a species. I know you wrote a few stories set in space - does your head 
still go there?
  
## 62 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Wed 7 Jan 04 20:00

    
He missed Battlestar Galactica, Jon.  That must be a clue.
  
## 63 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 04 07:57

    
Well, if you don't know space opera, you just don't
know science fiction very well.

On the other hand, I'm about to go hang out with
RAND corporation this morning.  Even in their
longest-range forecasts, I doubt that they foresee
Starship Enterprise TV set-ups where spacecraft
mysteriously have artificial gravity and aliens
are only as alien as human actors can get without
suffocating in the rubber mask.

I'll believe in people settling Mars at about the
same time I see people setting the Gobi Desert.
The Gobi Desert is about a thousand times
as hospitable as Mars and five hundred times
cheaper and easier to reach.  Nobody ever
writes "Gobi Desert Opera" because, well,
it's just kind of plonkingly obvious that there's
no  good reason to go there and live.  It's ugly,
it's inhospitable and there's no way to
make it pay.  Mars is just the same, really.
We just romanticize it because it's so hard to reach.

On the other hand, there might really be some
way to make living in the Gobi Desert pay.
And if that were the case, and you really
had communities making a nice cheerful
go of daily life on arid, freezing, barren rock
and sand, then a cultural transfer to Mars
might make a certain sense.

If there were a society with enough technical
power to terraform Mars, they would
certainly do it.  On the other hand.
by the time they got around to messing with Mars,
they would have been using all that power
to transform *themselves.*  So by the time
they got there and started rebuilding the
Martian atmosphere wholesale, they wouldn't
look or act a whole lot like Hollywood extras.
  
## 64 of 131: Life in the big (doctorow) Thu 8 Jan 04 08:03

    
Blogged that. Nice.
  
## 65 of 131: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 8 Jan 04 09:35

    
Great explanation.  The bumpersticker would be "Terraform Earth First."

(Of course, seems to me that some of our attempts to do that historically 
by moving species around have created environmental chaos.)
  
## 66 of 131: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Thu 8 Jan 04 09:54

    
It would follow that a plausible story about living on even a
terraformed Mars would be about people living there for the same
reasons and in the same ways that people live in the harsher deserts on
Earth. They would be small tribes chased off of the good land,
hermits, prospectors, mystics, and bandits.
  
## 67 of 131: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 8 Jan 04 09:56

    
Except that in the deep Mojave you meet those folks and they drifted there
with no money.  You don't drift to Mars with no money in any kind of economy
I can imagine.  I suppose you could be banished there in the Austrailian
prisoner settler model, but the economies are still not very plausible.
  
## 68 of 131: And on waking this morning I thought "Zeugma!" but it was too late. (tinymonster) Thu 8 Jan 04 09:58

    
Hmmm... so that leaves rich eccentrics.
  
## 69 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 04 09:59

    
I guess it's a relief to see that Mars isn't filled with cooters planning 
invasion (see http://www.sfsite.com/~silverag/anderson.html).

Can you give us a preview of your new novel, _The Zenith Angle_?
  
## 70 of 131: from FINN SMITH (tnf) Thu 8 Jan 04 10:16

    



Finn Smith writes:


> "If there were a society with enough technical power to terraform Mars,
> they would certainly do it.  On the other hand.  by the time they got
> around to messing with Mars, they would have been using all that power to
> transform *themselves.*  So by the time they got there and started rebuild-
> ing the Martian atmosphere wholesale, they wouldn't look or act a whole lot
> like Hollywood extras."

Need I point out that this is the premise of Bruce's novel Schismatrix and
the associated stories?

-F
  
## 71 of 131: Rob from off-Well writes (bumbaugh) Thu 8 Jan 04 12:10

    
Rob writes to say



> The high tailing it out of town reference wasn't about your leaving
for
> Colorado.  You came back at least.  It was about a couple who
hotfooted it
> to Hot Springs, Arkansas.  Bruce, is Hot Springs the next Austin?


Hot Springs isn't the new Austin.  Well, I don't think so anyway, and
neither do my friends who have lived there recently.

But if you're looking for a hotspot, the energy zone, the growth
region, and the place where the wierdos accrete, try NW Arkansas.  

Fayetteville/Springdale/Rogers/Bentonville.

We've got Wal Mart and Tyson up here (and an overall strange
concentration of millionaires).  Maybe we're not totally proud of them,
but we know a potential patron when we see one.  ;)  It's a wierd mix
of big business rubbing elbows with artsy earth hippies and renegade
hitech redneck artists.

Mmm, speaking of which, I was talking over a story with one of the
renegade artists in the area last night and got invited to a non-verbal
communication party.  Apparently, from 10-12, anyone speaking,
writing, or mouthing/miming a word will be booted.  Then a brief period
to blow off steam and discuss, followed by who knows how much more of
the same.

 

Bruce:

There's a million little reasons why Schismatrix is a wonder to me. 
Holy Fire in paperback I tell ya.  I've always wondered a couple of
small things though:

1, How did it feel when you were writing it?  Did you know it was
Fire?  Did you feel that it would be recieved better/worse?

2, Do you feel the same about writing now as you did then?  Or has it
morphed on you over the years into something new?  Which of your novels
did you enjoy writing the most?

(not asking you to pick what's better, old/young, now/then, etc, just
wondering how the craft of writing has changed you and changed FOR you
over the years since Schismatrix)
  
## 72 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 04 19:56

    


Great explanation.  The bumpersticker would be "Terraform Earth
First."

*In point of fact, through global warming we're busily
Venusifying the Earth.  On Venus, it snows vaporized lead
on the mountaintops. Or so they say.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/3236018.stm


inkwell.vue 204: The 2004 Bruce Sterling State of the World Address
#66 of 71: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Thu 08 Jan 2004 (09:54 AM)


It would follow that a plausible story about living on even a
terraformed Mars would be about people living there for the same
reasons and in the same ways that people live in the harsher deserts
on
Earth. They would be small tribes chased off of the good land,
hermits, prospectors, mystics, and bandits.

*Something like the hardy Pilgrims of Plymouth Rock, then?
Half of them starved to death.  I wonder
if people nowadays would consider a Martian colony a real  success
if half of them were dead of hunger in six months.

*Small tribes of mystics don't seem to be real good at
planning ahead.  They'd better have either Squanto.
or manna from heaven.  Otherwise there's hell to pay.
http://www.mayflowerfamilies.com/colonial_life/pilgrims.htm


Can you give us a preview of your new novel, _The Zenith Angle_?

*It's about a computer security expert who goes to
work for the Bush Administration after 9/11.  Complications
ensue.

Bruce:

There's a million little reasons why Schismatrix is a wonder to me. 
Holy Fire in paperback I tell ya.  I've always wondered a couple of
small things though:

1, How did it feel when you were writing it?

*I felt 29 years old.

Did you know it was Fire?  Did you feel that it would 
be recieved better/worse?

*I've learned not to try to outguess these things.
The book was very obscure when it came out, then it got
an underground reputation, and now it's considered
widely influential, but, well, that's not the end of its story.
Every passing epoch puts a different gloss on the past.

*Lookah this thing.  These guys are web-streaming amazingly bad
1960s psychedelic music, and they couldn't be more excited
if they were disinterring Assyrian bas-reliefs.
http://clavicenter.challenge.nl/klemtoon/eerste.html

2, Do you feel the same about writing now as you did then? 

*No.

Or has it morphed on you over the years into something new? 

*There's a major arc in a writing career.  You start with
a burning need to speak and embarrassing verbal clumsiness,
and you end with perfect technical facility and nothing
left to say.

 Which of your novels
did you enjoy writing the most?

*I was in a pretty good mood when I wrote HOLY FIRE.
  
## 73 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 04 05:27

    
Vincent Omniaveritas once wrote:

"As American SF lies in a reptilian torpor, its small, squishy cousin,
Fantasy, creeps gecko-like across the bookstands.  Dreaming of
dragon-hood, Fantasy has puffed itself up with air like a Mojave
chuckwalla.  SF's collapse had formed a vacuum that forces Fantasy into a
painful and explosive bloat."

What's the state of hard science fiction today? 
  
## 74 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Fri 9 Jan 04 08:32

    
What's wrong with our Space Program?  What's right?  What would you do if
you were head of NASA?
  
## 75 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Fri 9 Jan 04 11:02

    
What kinds of "complications ensue" in the Zenith Angle?  Where'd you dig up
that name "Zenith Angle"?
  
## 76 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 04 09:44

    

Vincent Omniaveritas once wrote:

"As American SF lies in a reptilian torpor, its small, squishy cousin,
Fantasy, creeps gecko-like across the bookstands.  Dreaming of
dragon-hood, Fantasy has puffed itself up with air like a Mojave
chuckwalla.  SF's collapse had formed a vacuum that forces Fantasy
into a
painful and explosive bloat."

What's the state of hard science fiction today? 

*Well, "hard science fiction" was traditionally the preserve
of physics majors.  Those guys have been awfully down in
the mouth ever since the collapse of the Superconducting
Super Collider.  If there was a moment when the cultural prestige
of the Atomic Age died on the floor of Congress, that
was it.

*The only rival for prestige that physics had was 
"computer science," but that lacks the rigor and
sublimity of physics because it's basically a melange
of ideas and techniques that are clustered around a
lame commercial gadget.

*So it's been very hard to whip up any rah-rah, crypto-religious
enthusiasm for hard SF as a torchbearer of the intellectual
avant-garde.  Instead, we see fantasy reach
its apotheosis with Aragorn and Arwen
Tolkien Barbie-doll figures.

http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00005BM41/downandoutint-20/002-0332863-2057621


inkwell.vue 204: The 2004 Bruce Sterling State of the World Address
#74 of 75: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Fri 09 Jan 2004 (08:32 AM)


What's wrong with our Space Program?  

*It needs a coherent reason to exist.
It's okay for Nazis and Communists to 
launch giant rockets as a kind of  public
relations loss-leader, but a capitalist society
has a hard time justifying an outlay that
size that has no revenue stream.

What's right? 

*Bin Laden can't do it. He is probably feeling
kind of humiliated by machines crawling around
on Mars.  It's public proof that his 
theology is crap.  

Bin Laden likes smashing big shiny aircraft (because
he can't build his own)  but smashing big shiny 
spacecraft is harder. Plus, spacecraft
can and do spy on him.  Delta Force with satellite
phones and  GPS might show up at his cave-mouth some day
if he gets careless.

 What would you do if
you were head of NASA?

*I'd throttle it way back with the cornball
sense-of-wonder Buck Rogers rhetoric, 
(for it's nice but it never lasts). I'd pull
a Teddy Roosevelt on the aerospace trusts
like LockheedGrummanMartinGeneralDynamics,
outsource the launch biz to cheap and eager
Indians and Chinese, and then fill the sky
around the earth with sophisticated 
monitors.

*There would be no Space Station, no
astronauts, no Shuttle.

*Having then fired everyone with a
Cold-War relic military-industrial  sinecure
and broken the iron rice-bowl, I would
hire young NASA engineers without preconceptions,
make them read the complete works of Freeman Dyson,
and see if we couldn't get into making and
launching something along the lines of
his "space chickens."  Something you can
throw into space that is cheap, small,
disposable and quasi-biological.
http://www-gap.dcs.st-and.ac.uk/~history/Obits2/Dyson_NYTimes.html
  
## 77 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sat 10 Jan 04 10:02

    
You hit that softball out of the park, Bruce.

Space chickens, that's it?  So you want to send organisms around the galaxy
and start a life building chain reaction?  I can see that.  It's fertile
ground for sci fi books and short stories and maybe a subplot of the up and
coming (maybe) Battlestar Galactica.

If you were to write a tv miniseries, what would it be about?  Why don't you
do this?  You probably have something lying around on those huge wall to
wall bookshelves or in one of those limitless piles in your library/office.

If you were building your home again, what would you do different?
  
## 78 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sat 10 Jan 04 11:43

    
Was it the Cylons or the humans that messed up?

What about doing a movie - sci fi - using homegrown videographers, writers
and actors/actresses?  You write the script and a team of volunteers make
it?  Local.  Homegrown.  Sci Fi.  Done with networked webcam/cameras.

What high tech sectors are going to grow in Austin?  I'm guessing your going
to say solar, biotech and gaming and less on semiconductors and software?
  
## 79 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sat 10 Jan 04 11:47

    
What's happening with the arts, poetry, music scene.  Will it flourish or be
squeezed?  Richard Florida?
  
## 80 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 10 Jan 04 15:30

    
Wait a minute, terry... if I have anything to do with it, it's WIRELESS 
that'll put Austin on the map. Or maybe Austin will put wireless on the 
map. And Bruce will be leading the charge with a massive wifi radio mast 
planted firmly on the roof of the Viridian Vatican. Just in time to 
televise the revolution...
  
## 81 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sat 10 Jan 04 16:48

    
Austin is already on the map.
  
## 82 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sat 10 Jan 04 16:52

    
Bruce, thinking of the 'electronic mob', how much political advantage
do you give to the slick use of the Internet in this upcoming election?
Do you think they can use it to skew things to their advantage during
this technological lull, while the 'old school' catches up to its
potential? I'm thinking in a couple of years it will all be so
commonplace that people will ignore it like everything else, but right
now it seems to have some potency.
  
## 83 of 131: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Sat 10 Jan 04 18:52

    
>I think Bush, whom I do not greatly admire, is a
>better man than his admin and than we credit him
>for. He responded to conservative pressure to 
>condemn Islam as a "failed religion" by attending 
>Friday services at a mosque and calling Islam a
>"religion of peace".

Yes, but did he do and say those things because he believes in them,
or did he do and save those things because the Saudis could see to it
our economy was wrecked and ruined just in time for his re-election
campaign if they, say, started selling oil only in Euros?

Remember, you're dealing with a man whose family has been making
sometimes-shady business deals with Saudi Princes for decades and
decades.  They've got each other by the balls.

My question for Bruce is, how long do you think we have before
advanced weapons of mass destruction – bio-engineered plagues, horrible
new toxins, suitcase nukes or container ship nukes that can't be
detected, or other stuff I haven't heard of yet – become available to
terror organizations like Osama's?  Because as I see it right now, the
threat from these nutjobs to the continental US is fairly low, apart
from their potential to disrupt the oil supply should they spark a
revolution somewhere like Saudi Arabia.  There are only so many big
high-rises they can smack planes into, and after a certain point it's
just not worth the effort.  But if they could float a nuke into San
Francisco Bay, or whip up a bioengineered virus that only kills men
with blonde hair, they could wreak serious havoc.  If we can determine
how long it is before such weapons might exist, we can develop a
timeline for dealing with the situation – we have this long to drain
the swamp of Islamic political culture before what's breeding there
bites and kills us.

Because as I see it, we've wasted an enormous amount of time and money
eliminating one of the most secular states in the Islamic world – Iraq
– while doing jack to defuse the threat posed by radical
fundamentalism in places like Pakistan or Egypt.  If anything, our
actions to date have only kindled the fires of fundamentalism as a
political movement in the Islamic world.
  
## 84 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 04 20:20

    
I'm interested in "smart mobs," and mobs have
traditionally been pretty good at agitation
and political pressure.  I don't quite see how mobs
are supposed to govern.  They might get somebody
elected, but when is somebody who has been
elected going to convey some real power on mobs?

Electronic democracy is a pretty old notion
now, but so far, despite some clear advances
in social software, I haven't seen so much
as a small city council that's truly run electronically.
I want to see this technique actually supplanting
earlier power structures, instead of just hacking them,
and adding an extra layer of spin.
Then I'll account myself a believer.

Just maybe, some day, when some bunch
of elected officials faces some political challenge,
 instead of  scaring up the usual cornball "blue-ribbon
panel" of worthy graybeards (generally appointed to
make sure that nothing actually happens for a while) --
they will instead declare:  "You know what we need in
a crisis like this?  We need Move-On!"

So, yeah.  When we see these nascent institutions 
deployed by some accountable power structure
to resolve real problems in the body politic, then
we'll know it's past the hype-and-bubble stage
and getting traction.  I'm inclined to think
that this is likeliest to happen in some place other
than America, though.  

The World Social Forum, maybe.  That
is a hobbyist talking-shop that really looks
painfully anxious to become some kind of
newfangled governmental body.  And after
such a revolution, things would be different.
Not better, mind you -- just different.
  
## 85 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 04 20:46

    
My question for Bruce is, how long do you think we have before
advanced weapons of mass destruction – bio-engineered plagues,
horrible
new toxins, suitcase nukes or container ship nukes that can't be
detected, or other stuff I haven't heard of yet – become available to
terror organizations like Osama's? 

*Interesting question.  I was just talking to some guys at RAND
about this just a couple of days ago, RAND being the original
home of Herman Kahn and "thinking the unthinkable."  What
you're basically asking about here is some "rogue unthinkable."

*We were discussing the likelihood of a "nuclear exchange"
within our lifetime, and we kind of agreed that the problem
with that idea nowadays isn't so much with "nuclear" as with
"exchange."  

For instance, if Pakistan disintegrates, it becomes MORE likely
that New Delhi vaporizes, but not because of some Code
Orange Defcon IV missile launch in a 1960s stylee.  
Instead, some kamikaze Kashmiris
just haul over a rogue Pakistani warhead in a bullock cart.
And not thirty warheads.  Just one or two.  A gang of terrorists
just doesn't have enough bureacratic capacity to do
more than one or two.  It's hard work.

So there is slaughter, there is mayhem, there is genocide
in a can, and the center of Indian government ceases to be.
And we sort of mulled that likelihood over for a while, and then
we went back to talking about AIDS.  Mostly because,
well, AIDS by any objective measure is going to be
a lot worse than that.  A whole lot worse.  

If global warming is going to kill off a million species
by mid-century or so (as was recently suggested)
that's worse than nukes, toxins and bioviruses, too.
And the trend-line there is really quite steady and blatant,
it doesn't require any imaginative stretch or sense
of paranoid alarmism.

The problem with "the unthinkable" is that when
it enters into your everyday cost-benefit analysis,
it's like dividing by zero.  Life becomes senseless. 

 It's reminiscent of
Steiner, the intellectual in Fellini's "La Dolce Vita,"
who, confronting the moral abyss of the 1960s,
murders his children and himself.  Wouldn't it
have been a little smarter of Steiner just to hang
loose and see if the Cold War didn't turn into
something he had never expected?  It's
easy to expect annihilation, but if you start
invading countries out of the blue because
you suspect they're 45 minutes from armageddon
and it turns out there's nothing much there,
it really can't much help the cause in the long run.
  
## 86 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sat 10 Jan 04 21:36

    
Thanks for the response Bruce -- more to chew on.
For the google impaired and those of us who like to point and click
the World Social Forum is just a click away at http://www.wsfindia.org
  
## 87 of 131: Ted (nukem777) Sat 10 Jan 04 22:15

    
gee, thanks for those comfortable words in #85, now that we're shaken
we might as well be stirred; politics and religion. And that was
certainly a case in point. How do see the major religions playing out
in the future? Are they forever entangled with politics? Are we at the
mercy of knee-jerk reactions to Luddites? Some kind of universal
Buddhism? A new secularism? All or some of the above or something
completely different?
  
## 88 of 131: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Sat 10 Jan 04 22:41

    
>The problem with "the unthinkable" is that when
>it enters into your everyday cost-benefit analysis,
>it's like dividing by zero.  Life becomes senseless. 

Excellent response.  Something I hadn't considered.  Thanks!

But one thing to keep in mind - you say that AIDS is going to be a
whole lot worse than terror WOMD, by any objective measure.  But:

1) We could discover a vaccine or cure or effective, inexpensive
treatment for AIDS tomorrow

and

2) If AIDS begins to depopulate some third world nations (which hasn't
begun to happen yet, in spite of a decade plus of dire warnings and
ominous trend lines), might it also relieve some of the pressures
driving the fundamentalist rampage to begin with?  Didn't the Black
Plague ultimately help to kick Europe out of the Dark Ages?  If so was
it bad fortune or good fortune?

It's like that old, supposedly Chinese story about the old man who
lost his horse (bad fortune) which soon returned home with a herd (good
fortune) which the man's son began to ride, until he fell from one of
the horses and broke his leg (bad fortune), which left him unable to go
fight in a battle in which he surely would have been killed (good
fortune).  And so on.
  
## 89 of 131: Reid Harward (reid) Sun 11 Jan 04 04:51

    
Hey Bruce, 

You mentioned some interesting ideas regarding technological tools and
the emergence of software frameworks for public participation and
democratic governance.  I find this intriguing, also.  I'm also
extrememly interested in how technology can lend some concrete forensic
accountability to, what I consider, dangerous, irresponsible media
like cable television news.  

Is there any way to subvert or diminish the influence cable news has
on how people perceive the world?  Do you consider it much of a
problem?  How does irresponsible information media rate as far as a
potential threat to stability and security on your personal scale?  
  
## 90 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 04 07:43

    
1) We could discover a vaccine or cure or effective, inexpensive
treatment for AIDS tomorrow

*I'm all for it.

and

2) If AIDS begins to depopulate some third world nations (which hasn't
begun to happen yet, in spite of a decade plus of dire warnings and
ominous trend lines), might it also relieve some of the pressures
driving the fundamentalist rampage to begin with?  Didn't the Black
Plague ultimately help to kick Europe out of the Dark Ages?  If so was
it bad fortune or good fortune?

*Well, that was the particularly frustrating part of this RAND
discussion.
For ages I've been trying to find a simple spreadsheet or pie
chart that describes whether or not Africa is having a demographic
AIDS
disaster.  Twenty years from now: more Africans?  Fewer?  What's
the story?

*The truth is nobody can tell.  They don't have the necessary
facts to make sound conjectures.  They don't know how fast AIDS
is spreading, what varieties of AIDS are spreading, why
AIDS in Africa seems to be heterosexual when that's still a
rarity in the developed world, how long people will live
with AIDS, or how much war and civil disorder there will be,
which always helps to spread epidemics.  So futurists
seem unable to squeeze even a ballpark figure out of
this massive plague, which seems weird, but such is the
state of the forecasting game.

Massive social calamities like epidemics never have simple
and straightforward effects.  So, if you're Cortez, you can
presumably chuckle into your conquistador beard over the
fact that smallpox is annihilating the Aztec population, so
that you don't have to.  However, from a more general
and humane perspective, I don't think this makes smallpox
good news.  We're a lot better off organizing to rid
our species of smallpox than we are coming up with
Jesuitical arguments to claim that it's somehow good for us in
the long run.
  
## 91 of 131: Seahorses of the Liver (mnemonic) Sun 11 Jan 04 12:14

    

Bruce, it looks like the president is going to announce plans for a
permanent moon base and (rather more nutty, IMHO, given the state of the
art) a manned mission to Mars.  Any followup thoughts on these looming
initiatives?
  
## 92 of 131: Thomas Petersen (sushi101) Sun 11 Jan 04 15:55

    
sunspot

1) We could discover a vaccine or cure or effective, inexpensive
treatment for AIDS tomorrow

We can without much effort cure measels a few cents per person, yet
400.000 kids in Africa dies of this every year. Often it is not the
cures but the political will that is the problem. This is why everyone
jumps in to help on SARS, they know that they can be hit by it and
there is not cure, they cannot justify to their voters that they do not
do anything about the problem. With AIDS it seems different (I think)
because the politicians does not really need to react to anything.
People have kind of accepted that AIDS is the problem of the
individual. 

Well that is at least how I experience it here in Denmark.
  
## 93 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 04 16:51

    
Just a comment, since others have loads of questions and I can prop up my 
feet and relax... 

Mitch Ratcliffe and I are editing a book on 'emergent democracy' for
O'Reilly Books, so I'm paying attention to the current state of
"electronic democracy" thinking and tools, and it's beginning to look more
and more interesting.  Today technophiliacs can be somewhat effective
organizing politically online, and that's begun to overlap the mainstream,
most recently via the Dean and Clark presidential campaigns, which have
made effective use of 'net tools to organize and raise money. You can use 
standard tools to organize grassroots lobbying efforts, too... and I'm 
waiting for the day that ordinary citizens swarm their legislators and 
effectively overcome some bit of obnoxious legislation, like the recent 
surreal redistricting of Texas.
  
## 94 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sun 11 Jan 04 17:21

    
I'll chime in with Mike on the Mars/moonbase question, I think you partly
answered it a couple of days back.  .
  
## 95 of 131: Dennis Wilen (the-voidmstr) Sun 11 Jan 04 18:02

    
<jonl>:

For a while I've been meme-casting my explanation of the the
difference between the Internet and other media "pipes":  It's about
the uploads.

Submitted for your consideration: 

www.moveon.org 's open call for anti-Bush political commercials - TV
spots that will soon blankent the Nation.  

By ordinary folks for ordinary folks.
  
## 96 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Sun 11 Jan 04 19:53

    
Isn't this what bushin30seconds.com did, did you see these Dennis?
  
## 97 of 131: William H. Dailey (whdailey) Sun 11 Jan 04 21:39

    
The candidate from Vermont is a Fabian Socialist.
Our nation was created a Republic, not a Democracy.
9/11 happened because Afganistan wanted to charge too much to allow a
pipeline across their country.  The power elite needed an excuse to go
to war against them.  "Computer Software Science" has been invaded by
Socialism.  It could be much more systematic as is Computer Hardware
Science.  NASA could use the flying saucers we have hidden in "Area 51"
which were invented decades ago by the great engineer-scientist Tesla.
 In fact we could all be flying flying saucers instead of driving
cars.  No fuel, no fuel taxes, no roads, and no pollution.
The power elite have been supressing advanced energy production for
most of the last century.  Now they plan to take over the energy scene
using a catalyst that creates Hydrogen, Oxygen, and Electricity.  See:

http://www.worldenergymanagement.com

There already is an example of non-polluting, decentralized power.
see:

http://www.jeffotto.com

There is a cure for AIDS.  It is just not generally known.  

See:

http://www.devvy.com

Other bad diseases would go away too, but for certain government
agencies.
  
## 98 of 131: Dennis Wilen (the-voidmstr) Sun 11 Jan 04 22:31

    
Paranoia strikes deep
Into your life it will creep
It starts when you're always afraid
  
## 99 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Mon 12 Jan 04 06:28

    
You nailed it Jon.  Todays AAS says "wireless may be Austin's next big
frontier"; it's on the Tech Monday Main page; "91 companies in Austin have a
strong focus on wireless".

And the wireless seminaar tomorrrow at MCC is "sold out".

Bruce, what was the process you went through in deciding to write your new
book, what were your research tools and what did you discover in the process
of writing it.  Referring to Zenith Angle.
  
## 100 of 131: Sharon Lynne Fisher (slf) Mon 12 Jan 04 07:11

    
What *is* Fabian Socialism?  I've heard of it a few times but never
really got a definition.
  
## 101 of 131: Berliner (captward) Mon 12 Jan 04 07:24

    
It's the kind espoused by a once-handsome ex-pop star from
Philadelphia. 
  
## 102 of 131: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Mon 12 Jan 04 07:29

    
Silly. It is the notion that socialism is so clearly the best way out
of this mess that one need only explain it properly for rational people
to embrace it. True so far as it goes, but there turned out to be a
shortage of rational people. Shaw was a Fabian socialist, and a lot of
his prefaces point out that his plays are both socialist propaganda and
great art.
  
## 103 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 04 08:14

    
Well, it's always hard to out-guess the Bush Administration,
as heaven only knows what wacky crank has got their ear, 
but let's just, for the fun of it, assume that I'm Karl Rove.  

What's the deal with the Moon and Mars pitch?

1. We wanted to say something cool during the Wright Brothers
re-enactment, but the plane fell  into the mud.  

If Beagle was chirping on the surface of Mars while
Spirit had crashed into a crater at Mach 5,  we wouldn't
have said one word about Mars or the Moon.  What we really 
want out of all this is a chance to look great on TV.  And
we got one. It's not a serious investment of our political capital.
We're blowing smoke about stuff that could only happen
twenty years from now.  In other words, from our
point of view, never.

2.  Just as a general principle, Dad had prudence but
no vision, while Son has vision but no prudence.  Forget
the prudence thing.  It's a proven vote-loser.  It doesn't
hurt to throw loose cash at Big Science during a massive
deficit.  Reagan blew tons of money "throwing deep" 
on the Superconducting Super Collider, got absolutely
nothing out of it, and nobody cares or remembers.
Hell, he's going to replace Roosevelt on the dime.

3.  The International Space Station is leaky.  It's
stupid, expensive and useless, not just because it's a white elephant
with no real scientific or commercial uses, but because
it's "International."  We don't do International. We
only do Unilateral.  Declare a unilateral Mars Mission.
Then we can mothball the international Station and also get
rid of that colossal PR disaster, the Shuttle.  We
get rid of those relics by claiming we're doing something much
grander and greater, and then some other Administration
shuts down the  silly Mars thing and it's not our fault.
Genius!

4.  It doesn't matter what happens to big-brain computer geeks,
but if the aerospace biz gets offshored, we won't
be able to bomb anybody.  We need to sink some taxpayer
bucks into the aerospace biz because Airbus is eating Boeing's
lunch.  If we just give them cash, though, we'll have to
have another embarrassing trade-war climb-down like we
did over the steel tariffs.  So let's announce that we're
going to Mars.  Then our aerospace corporate welfare gets
camouflaged with some sci-fi spin.  We also get to have
an industrial policy even though free-marketeers always hate that.
It's great to have an industrial policy, you can buy votes with it.
Lotta aerospace in Arnie's California, let's buy them!

5.  The Space Race won us the Cold War.  Why not the
War on Terror?  We've got a serious dream gap with this bin Laden guy.
His mean-spirited, heavily armed world of resentful
fundie oil sheiks looks way too much like our own Administration.
If we declare that the Official American Future involves trips
to Mars, he's got no PR counter to that. What's he gonna
do, cite the verses on Mars in the Koran?  

Bin Laden's got no feel-good thing.  Astronauts on Mars, that's a
feel-good thing.  We've got everybody plenty scared now,
they know our military threats have credibility.  We
need a kinder-gentler angle.  Not a mushy, kiss-the-babies one,
though.
We need one with big macho rockets.  Kinder, gentler,
interplanetary space missiles.  Man, I am digging this.

6.  India and China are launching Moon probes and taikonauts.
They got some headlines for that.  We'll throw 'em a little
of the old Fear Uncertainty and Doubt here.  They're
trying to upstage the Microsoft of Space Flight.  
The Chinese and Indians should stick to what they do best,
making cheap shoes and running call-centers.  We're
the ones with the copyrighted stars on the flag, and let's 
make sure that everybody's still got that straight.

7.  It's news above the fold in the Post and
Times that doesn't smell like napalm in the morning.
We need some of that, it's a relaxing change of pace.
If Spirit and Opportunity are really popping wheelies
and busting rocks all over Mars for three months,
it's gonna be a fun spring season!  Get in front
of the parade and wave the flag!  What can it hurt?
  
## 104 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Mon 12 Jan 04 09:56

    
So it boils down to, we're not going to have a space program.  This amounts
to the dismantling of the space program as we know it?  Whatever happened to
radio astronomy and the kind of feel good vibes espoused in "Contact" with
bongo boy and Jodi Foster?
  
## 105 of 131: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Mon 12 Jan 04 10:29

    
We have to have enough of a space program to keep communication,
navigation, and surveillance satellites running. We can't do without
those anymore, and we are are going to need them even more if the
weather goes funny. We don't need the moon or Mars for that, though,
and we don't need people up there either. Robots and space chickens
will do.

It was very exciting when the Mir kept breaking down and the old
experienced cosmonauts would smack it a few times and make it go again.
I would love to see cheap space stations made to be repaired many
times up there for the long haul, inhabited by experienced
space-dwellers. But I really only want it to happen because it would be
so cool and would make such good stories. That does not seem like
adequate justification for spending billions of dollars of public
funds.
  
## 106 of 131: Ron Sipherd (ronks) Mon 12 Jan 04 12:44

    
> It was very exciting when the Mir kept breaking down

It reminded me of the space jalopies in Alfred Bester's "The Stars My
Destination".
  
## 107 of 131: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Mon 12 Jan 04 18:31

    
Vinay, from off-Well, writes:




Let's talk about money for a moment. Bernard Lietaer, one of the
coauthors of the Euro, is now pushing a world currency designed to cure
- well, the common cold, but specifically the urge to turn ecological
assets into hard cash, and global trade imbalances.

http://www.google.com/search?q=bernard+lietaer+terra&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8


Do you think this matters? Does it have legs?

On another front, is there any chance whatsoever of making money in
space? Or is commercial exploitation of space basically a distant
dream?
  
## 108 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 04 20:45

    
I'm waiting for the private space missions, myself, and remembering those 
commercial shuttle flights in 2001. Let the entrepreneurs handle it. 
Wouldn't that be more interesting than a space program run by bureaucrats?
  
## 109 of 131: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Tue 13 Jan 04 07:00

    
Drifting some, well considerable, how do you think Iraq will play out?
There's an article in this week's NYT Magazine about a Ph.D. in
counter-insurgency who is getting a chance to test his theories in
Iraq. His theory is that if you use too much force, you make more
insurgents, and if you use too little, you get beaten. His book is
called "How to Eat Soup with a Knife." In practice, he finds, it is
more difficult than that.

Perhaps the government will decide that we need to have locals enforce
order for us, a local, a ruthless, dictatorial, non-religious, heavily
armed local. That would be entertaining.
  
## 110 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 04 10:50

    
Vinay, from off-Well, writes:

Let's talk about money for a moment. Bernard Lietaer, one of the
coauthors of the Euro, is now pushing a world currency designed to
cure
- well, the common cold, but specifically the urge to turn ecological
assets into hard cash, and global trade imbalances.

http://www.google.com/search?q=bernard+lietaer+terra&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8


Do you think this matters? Does it have legs?

*Well, you've got to be quite the optimist to engage in major
currency reforms.  A lot of people have some claim to success
in the Euro; victory has a hundred fathers while defeat is
an orphan.

*If the Euro's got an "author" it was Pierre Werner,
a politician from Luxembourg who had a great French-German
name, and a long life, and a whole lot of wiles and patience.
http://www.optimists.cc/optimists/pwobituary.htm

*Werner also used to handwave about a single world currency.
This would have obvious benefits, but I also have to wonder
what would happen if such a thing were mismanaged and
hyperinflated.  What if the whole world was so hopelessly
indebted to itself and went broke?  Who would bail us
out then, Mars?

*This isn't the first time I've heard of Bernard Lietaer,
who has some interestingly weird ideas but, like the Pope,
not a lot of battalions.

On another front, is there any chance whatsoever of making money in
space? Or is commercial exploitation of space basically a distant
dream?

*I think there is honest, modest money to be made in
sending satellites into low earth orbit.  The planet needs
those  for ships, navigation, earth sensing, weather
forecasting. Satellite TV has set down a lot of roots.  It's
a real business, if you leave out the bank-busting astronaut
pageantry.  

*Even 450 million or so isn't a bad price for
Mars pics in my opinion.  That's what, less than two bucks a head
for the US population? We're really enjoying this Mars thing.  It's
genuinely entertaining.  Nothing wrong with that.

Drifting some, well considerable, how do you think Iraq will play out?

*They're a basket-case.  You can liberate a lot of popular energy
when you have a national insurgency to drive the hated invaders from
the national soil, but you need some guy of the caliber of
Kemal Ataturk or Ho Chi Minh to pull that off.  He
needs a clear cause, and fame, and a realistic game plan, and a
victory condition
so that people know when to stop killing, and the ability to impose
order in liberated areas.  Detonating ambulances and killing
collaborators
and foreigners more or less at random just cannot do those things.
A national liberation front isn't a frenzied slave rebellion.


There's an article in this week's NYT Magazine about a Ph.D. in
counter-insurgency who is getting a chance to test his theories in
Iraq. His theory is that if you use too much force, you make more
insurgents, and if you use too little, you get beaten. His book is
called "How to Eat Soup with a Knife." In practice, he finds, it is
more difficult than that.

*I tend to think that the ur-text of this struggle is "Lawrence
of Arabia."  It's pretty much all there, really: spies, bribes,
attacks on convoys, suicidal sacrifice, war crimes, cynical
embedded journalists, torture in the police station, capturing
Damascus and having it catch fire because nobody can run the
fire trucks or the electrical generators, Arabs ignoring the
overlords for the wild pleasure they take in cutting each other's
throats, bemused white-guy imperialists who would sort of
like to help them out Rudyard-Kipling style, but are reduced
to just kinda emptily staring....  That may have been a long
time ago, but it's pretty much fresh as yesterday's news.

Perhaps the government will decide that we need to have locals enforce
order for us, a local, a ruthless, dictatorial, non-religious, heavily
armed local. That would be entertaining.

*Kemal Ataturk.  I do find it hard to believe that any coalition
of aliens can stitch the Moslem world together with bayonets.
They are going to have to find authentic political talent
who can give them a convincing reason to live.  And they're never
going to find that in Al Qaeda.  Those guys are nihilists
who kill everybody they can get their hands on, including their own.
  
## 111 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 13 Jan 04 17:30

    
Can you bring us up to date on the Viridian Design project? Is it what you 
hoped it would be when you created it?
  
## 112 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 04 18:19

    
A friend of mine in GBN just found some AIDS demographics for me.
They're UN population projections, and they may be more than
a little rubbery, but at least they are back-of-the-envelope scenarios
by people who know what they're doing.

Forgive me for deluging the readership with numbers and charts
here, but proper futurists live on this stuff.

First, the estimated situation NOW.  As background, the median
age for dying of AIDS after infection is ten years.  Look at
the percentages in some of these southern African countries.
We're looking at situations where a *large majority* of today's
teenagers in those countries will get AIDS at some time in
their lifespan.

         Country  

Estimated number of HIV  positive persons  aged 15-49 in 2001 

 HIV prevalence among  persons aged 15-49  (percentage)  

Africa   
  
1  Angola   320 000  5.5  
2  Benin   110 000  3.6  
3  Botswana   300 000  38.8  <--------
4  Burkina Faso   380 000  6.5 
5  Burundi   330 000  8.3  
6  Cameroon   860 000  11.8  
7  Central African Republic   220 000  12.9  
8  Chad   130 000  3.6  
9  Congo   99 000  7.2  
10  Côte d'Ivoire   690 000  9.7  
11  Democratic Republic of the Congo  1 100 000  4.9  
12  Djibouti  1   30 000  7.1  
13  Equatorial Guinea   5 500  3.4  
14  Eritrea   49 000  2.8  
15  Ethiopia  1 900 000  6.4  
16  Gabon  1   27 000  3.6  
17  Gambia   7 900  1.6  
18  Ghana   330 000  3.0  
19  Guinea  1   78 000  1.8  
20  Guinea-Bissau   16 000  2.8  
21  Kenya  2 300 000  15.0  
22  Lesotho   330 000  31.0  
23  Liberia  1   114 000  6.5  
24  Malawi   780 000  15.0  
25  Mali   100 000  1.7  
26  Mozambique  1 000 000  13.0  
27  Namibia   200 000  22.5  <------
28  Nigeria  3 200 000  5.8  
29  Rwanda   430 000  8.9  
30  Sierra Leone   150 000  7.0  
31  South Africa  4 700 000  20.1 <--------
32  Sudan   410 000  2.6  
33  Swaziland   150 000  33.4  
34  Togo   130 000  6.0  
35  Uganda   510 000  5.0  
36  United Republic of Tanzania  1 300 000  7.8  
37  Zambia 1 000 000  21.5  
38  Zimbabwe  2 000 000  33.7 <--------   

And by contrast:

1  Russian Federation   700 000  0.9  
2  United States of America   890 000  0.6 
  
## 113 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 04 18:21

    
*As they explain here, the methodology is a little shaky.
Lots of unknowable variables.

http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/adultmort/Adultmortality.htm

  In considering this assessment of the demographic impact of
HIV/AIDS, the reader should bear in  mind that there is much
uncertainty surrounding both the estimated prevalence of the disease in
different  populations and the path that the epidemic will follow in
the future. Furthermore, more needs to be known  about the dynamics of
the epidemic itself. For example, it is not certain that the
progression from HIV  infection to AIDS and from AIDS to death will
occur according to the same model schedule in all  populations or even
in most populations in a geographical region. The introduction of
therapies that  increase the survivorship of infected persons would
require the use of different models. Similarly,  estimates of the
chances of transmission of the disease from mother to child also need
to be validated in a  variety of settings, and will need modification
if concerted action is taken to prevent mother-to-child  transmission
by the use of appropriate drug therapy. Changes in the assumptions made
regarding any of  these modelling inputs could result in sizeable
changes in the projection results. Consequently, the data  presented
here should at best be considered as indicative of the possible toll
that the epidemic might take  under the specific assumptions made.    
  
## 114 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 04 18:26

    
*Then the brass tacks.

In the seven most affected  countries, whose adult HIV prevalence in
2001 was above 20 per cent, AIDS is projected to bring  population
growth almost to a halt. Thus, the population of those seven countries
is projected to increase  by just 4 million people between 2000 and
2050 or less than 1 per cent. In the absence of AIDS, their  overall
population would have nearly doubled. While the average annual growth
rate in this group of  countries remains above zero during 2000-2050,
in fact their overall population declines over the 20202030 decade
(data not shown).    

  Because of increased mortality, population growth in Botswana has
already been significantly  reduced and population decline is projected
to begin in 2005-2010. The average annual growth rate of  Botswana’s
population dropped from 3.3 per cent per year in 1980-1985 to 2.1 per
cent in 1995-2000 and  is expected to decline further to –0.4 per cent
per year in 2005-2010 (figure 8). By 2050, Botswana’s  population is
expected to be 1.4 million, 20 per cent smaller than its population in
2000 and 63 per cent  lower than the population projected for 2050 in
the absence of AIDS.    

In South Africa, the epidemic started later than in Eastern and Middle
Africa. Yet, by 2001, one  out of every five adults in the country was
infected by the disease. While HIV prevalence is lower than in 
neighbouring Botswana and Zimbabwe, because of its larger population
South Africa has more than  double the number of persons infected of
the two other countries combined. According to projected levels  of
future HIV incidence, 48 out of every 100 persons aged 15 in South
Africa in 2000 will likely become  infected by age 50. <----

*Kind of staggers the imagination, doesn't it?
"Welcome to South Africa, 2035!  Half of us have AIDS!"


Although the full impact of the epidemic is yet to be felt,
projections over the next  decade or two reveal a dire situation. Life
expectancy, which was barely affected in 1990-1995, is  projected to
drop to 41.5 years by 2010-2015, 26.8 years below the level it would
have had in the absence  of AIDS.     When the higher mortality induced
by HIV infection is coupled with the low fertility levels  prevalent
in South Africa, the country is expected to begin experiencing
population decline in 2005-2010 <----

*That's a year away!

 (figure 10) and continued population reductions are projected to
persist until 2050. By then, South  Africa’s population is expected to
be 9 per cent lower than the country’s population in 2000 and 44 per 
cent lower than the 2050 population projected in the absence of AIDS.  
 


*The global summary:

By 2050, world population is expected to  be 479 million lower than it
would have been in the absence of AIDS. Africa alone is expected to
have  320 million fewer inhabitants in 2050 than it would have had
without AIDS.
  
## 115 of 131: Dennis Wilen (the-voidmstr) Tue 13 Jan 04 18:38

    
Malthus lives.
  
## 116 of 131: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Tue 13 Jan 04 20:03

    
How on Earth is AIDS going to infect half the population of South
Africa?  Is anal intercourse outside of marriage that common?  Because
the transmission rates for vaginal intercourse are very low.  Or is
their blood supply compromised?

And how are the men getting infected in the first place?  I can see
how the women might get it if they're engaging in anal sex, but the
men?  Is IV drug use rampant in South Africa?
  
## 117 of 131: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Tue 13 Jan 04 20:16

    
On a completely different subject, Slashdot today carried a story
about a new kind of nuclear rocket.  Well, I guess it's not all that
new, but I hadn't heard about it here in my cave:

http://science.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=04/01/13/1816227&mode=thread&tid=126&tid=134&tid=160

As a lot of people have pointed out in the thread, are rockets like
this even going to be necessary?  It looks like the technology might be
coming into place to take the space elevator from fantasy to reality,
perhaps within the next decade:

http://www.spaceelevator.com/docs/521Edwards.pdf
http://www.isr.us/SEhome.asp?m=1

Given what you know, do you think the space elevator will be coming to
a space near you anytime soon?  (Sorry, couldn't resist!)  And what do
you think the implications would be?  Orbital power sats beaming
essentially free juice back to Earth?  Asteroid mining?  Orbital and
offworld colonies?  Those are all the usual suspects, but I'm wondering
if there might be some unusual suspects.
  
## 118 of 131: Paul Terry Walhus (terry) Wed 14 Jan 04 05:30

    
What would you like to see in a sci fi movie?
  
## 119 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 04 07:53

    
I am digging that space elevator, actually.  The devil is in
the details, but I think it's less farfetched than it sounds.
The best-laid plan for one that I've seen is actually
a very flimsy, delicate, feminine thing, kind of like
a long black typewriter ribbon into low orbit.
It has an elegance.

If you had one, you could gently and almost soundlessly
distribute a lot of hardware into low orbit without
massive explosions, cartwheeling space junk,
stratospheric chemical pollution and the other hassles
that come with chemical rockets.

When it comes to interplanetary travel, you have two
realistic choices.  You can either send small unmanned
packages that take years and years and don't mind
frying in radiation, or else you go for fusion and fission
power that is capable of moving humans and their
life support systems quickly.  Chemical rockets
just don't have the muscle.  You've got to waste
so much overhead lugging chemicals that the project
becomes ungainly.

Fission is filthy.  Fusion is always "fifty years away."
Otherwise we'd have done it already.

Launching nukes up through the atmosphere is
not that pleasing an idea, but quietly reeling
little pieces of nuke up a typewriter ribbon and
assembling them far away, that's not too bad a notion.

I'm not quite sure what people are supposed to
do out there -- I never saw how solar and asteroid
mining were supposed to pay off, practicallty speaking -- 
but there might be some people with a few
dozen billion bucks in resources who just plain
want to go look around.  They could make some speeches,
knock some golf balls around, pick up some souvenirs --
hey, it happened once.  Why not again?
  
## 120 of 131: turing testy (cascio) Wed 14 Jan 04 10:44

    
One argument for asteroid mining is that the environmental costs of
Earthside mining are pretty severe, so when those are included, the cost of
mining in space (given the existence of elevators) may be competitive.

Also: if/when we finally get working fusion reactors, Helium-3 is far more
abundant on the Moon and asteroids than on Earth, and 3He allows a cleaner
and much more efficient fusion reaction than the more common Helium-2
isotope.

Regarding space elevators: bear in mind that completing the first one makes
subsequent elevators all the cheaper to build. With the ribbon version (as
opposed to the KSR-Mars Trilogy Giant Tower version) it's relatively easy to
put the Earthside base off the equator, making them even more economically
feasible. Also, since you need the other end of the elevator to be at or
beyond geosynchronous orbit, you have a helluva lot of momentum at the top
of the spike -- it's an ideal location for launching out of the Earth's
gravity well at a good clip.
  
## 121 of 131: Dan Flanery (sunspot) Wed 14 Jan 04 10:52

    
Yeah, an elevator out to 91,000 miles or km or whatever (I didn't work
on that Mars probe, I'll have you know) can shoot payloads straight to
Jupiter.  And small, fast-rotating bodies (like asteroids, or the
moons of Jupiter) can make due with very short elevators.

Are the orbital solar panels not worth it?  Because I thought the 24
hrs of daylight and no atmospheric interference (clouds, etc.) made
space-based solar almost twice as efficient as ground-based solutions. 
If you could get stuff up there for $100 a pound instead of $2,000 a
pound . . .
  
## 122 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 15 Jan 04 08:48

    
On the subject of Viridian Movement, I have to plug "Worldchanging."

http://www.worldchanging.com

Email, which was the substrate of Viridian List, is almost
broken now by the deadly combination of spammers and Microsoft.
Given that I have a daily weblog and a monthly
magazine column, I don't have enough hours in the
day to agitate as much as I would like.  I'm not
going to abandon the list, though.  I derived a personal
education in design from running that thing.
Nowadays I do quite a lot of design writing.
Running the list keeps me up to speed on the issues.

These Worldchanging guys, however, have much more of a 
"movement" thing going on. They are a genuine cadre.
They met through Viridian List, they whipped this
weblog together in an impressive spasm of competence,
and they are just blogging that thing till the world
looks level.  I am really pleased with that website.
Most everything they talk about or link to is of direct
relevance to my interests, and it has just the cultural
sensibility that I want to see widely promulgated.

I don't contribute much to "Worldchanging" myself, but I feel
a real sense of accomplishment at becoming an
eminence grise there, somewhere in the link-list.
One throws one's bread on the waters and lo
it returns ten-fold.
  
## 123 of 131: an impressive spasm of competence (tinymonster) Thu 15 Jan 04 09:57

    
^-- Hmm... I just may keep this one.  Thanks, Bruce!
  
## 124 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 15 Jan 04 21:06

    
I was happy as a clam to join the Worldchanging team - it's the closest 
thing we have to CoEvolution Quarterly aka Whole Earth Review, now more or 
less defunct (with the last issue, edited by Worldchanging's Alex Steffen, 
sadly unpublished).

I think CQ/WER (actually called Whole Earth Magazine in its final 
incarnation) was the single biggest influence on my life and thought. 
Bruce, you edited an issue and I know you read it for a while, did it get 
under your skin, too?

(Note to all: we end this tomorrow, so post 'em if you've got 'em.)
  
## 125 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 04 07:42

    

I wish I could have edited Whole Earth as a regular gig.
But my opportunity costs were too high.  I've never
seen a magazine, even plump, glossy, commercial ones,
where the staff and editors weren't busier than
a family with newborn twins.  I just don't have it
in me to focus that hard.  I would have to settle
down on one enterprise and shoot off my thundering herd of
hobbyhorses, and, well, I don't have the heart.

The "single biggest influence in my life and thought"
has always been science fiction.  I veer away from
it sometimes, because I like to dabble and I
don't much care to concentrate, but that was
my formative milieu.  It's a nice, loose, scatterbrained one.
It really suits my proclivities.

The last three books I've written were an
experimental fantasy novel, a nonfiction futurist
book and a technothriller.  Now, though, I'm at work
on an SF book set in the 2060s.  And man, that's
like a holy cause.  It's really got me gritting my teeth
and hyperventilating.  It's quite a taxing effort, but,
well, it's what I'm best at.  "The ever-popular
tortured artist effect" -- it's kinda tedious, but,
y'know, one takes pride in it. 

This Mars cartoon is top o' the blog charts today.
Man that guy is funny.

http://www.mnftiu.cc/mnftiu.cc/war30.html
  
## 126 of 131: Coleman K. Ridge (ckridge) Fri 16 Jan 04 08:09

    
It is hard to play the futurist game about AIDS in Africa. Africa does
not effect the rest of the world as much as it is affected by it. 

Will the AIDS epidemic in Africa have any long-term effects, taking
the misery and death it causes to be short-term effects?

I can suggest one possibility. The huge number of AIDS orphans could
give rise to a new kind of society in Africa, in which few people know
how to be parents, because few have had one.
  
## 127 of 131: turing testy (cascio) Fri 16 Jan 04 08:28

    
Jon, Alex & I are happy that you're part of our team, too!

(Other active WorldChanging contributors are Dawn Danby in Toronto, Zaid
Hassan in London, and Alan AtKisson in Stockholm.)

Thanks for your support of our work, Bruce. You've long been a real
inspiration for me and for Alex.

About science fiction: SF books set in the 2060s are rare these days. How 
difficult has it been for you to write something set in the "readers may 
actually live to see this" future, given the pace of 
political/technological/social/weirdness churn at present? 
  
## 128 of 131: Yannis Stefanopoulos writes to ask (bumbaugh) Fri 16 Jan 04 11:37

    
Yannis Stefanopoulos from off-Well:


Bruce, do you believe that industrial design will continue to be a
viable occupation into the middle-and-late-century, or will some kind
of electronically-mediated 'democratization'/'mass-customization' of
the design & production process (as explored in the Tomorrow Now's "The
Lover" chapter and certain of your Metropolis contributions) negate,
somewhat, the traditional role of the professional designer?
  
## 129 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 04 15:58

    
Well, we're not on Mars or the Moon yet, but the
swift obliteration of the NASA installed base has
already begun.

Tough break about the Hubble.  That thing
was actually useful.


Date: Fri, 16 Jan 2004 13:18:05 -0800 (PST)
From: Alex Filippenko <...@astron.berkeley.edu>
To:
Subject: horrible news: Hubble Space Telescope Servicing Mission 4 and
    future cancelled.


Subject: SM4
Date: Fri, 16 Jan 2004 12:56:34 -0500
From: Steven Beckwith <...@stsci.edu>
Reply-To: Steven Beckwith <...@stsci.edu>
To:

Colleagues,

A few minutes ago, we concluded a meeting at which Sean O'Keefe, the
NASA Administrator, announced his decision to cancel SM4, the next
servicing mission to Hubble. It was his decision alone, and I will
discuss the details with your personally.  I will be holding a
town-hall meeting in the auditorium at 3:00 pm today for everyone who
is interested to answer your questions about the decision and talk
about the future.

  Steve


Just coincidentally, this arrived just moments before the Hubble
message:

Mars Mission a Trojan Horse?

By Suneel Ratan
Story location:
http://www.wired.com/news/technology/0,1282,61937,00.html

02:00 AM Jan. 16, 2004 PT

President Bush's plan to go to the moon and to Mars without much
additional funding will force NASA and Congress to make hard choices --
particularly regarding the space shuttle and the hugely expensive
International Space Station, observers said.

The Bush plan increases NASA's budget by just $1 billion over the next
five years. That means the space agency has to figure out how to carry
out the mission -- first a return to the moon and later a trip to Mars
-- without a lot of additional money in its budget.

The first places to look for resources are the station and shuttle,
which consume about a third of NASA's $15 billion budget. One question
that's sure to arise -- assuming Bush's vision for the moon and Mars
sticks -- is whether to kill the station and shuttle now, instead of in
six to 12 years as the plan currently envisions, said Howard McCurdy,
a space historian at American University in Washington. That would free
up at least $25 billion over the next five years to go to the moon and
Mars.
  
## 130 of 131: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 04 16:10

    
Yannis Stefanopoulos from off-Well:


Bruce, do you believe that industrial design will continue to be a
viable occupation into the middle-and-late-century

*The occupation may not call itself 
"industrial design," but yes.

 or will some kind
of electronically-mediated 'democratization'

*No way

/'mass-customization'

*Yes way

 of
the design & production process (as explored in the Tomorrow Now's
"The
Lover" chapter and certain of your Metropolis contributions) negate,
somewhat, the traditional role of the professional designer?

*That "tradition" only dates back to the 1930s.
And during that time, people calling themselves
"designers" have been working themselves into
most every possible nook and cranny in the
industrial process.  They've never yet managed
to take over the whole shebang, because if
they did, they wouldn't be called "designers,"
they'd be called things like "moguls,"
"eccentric millionaires," Steve Jobs or
Richard Branson, maybe.

*There's already plenty of "electronic mediation."
That might as well just be named the "Web Designer's
Full Employment Act."  It doesn't democratize
the situation so that I the customer become
the designer.  It just means that I need
some mediators for my mediators' mediators.

*Let me demonstrate this for you.  For
somebody who's not a graphic designer,
I know a lot about graphic design.  I know
enough to go address the national meeting
of AIGA.  And I know so much about webloggers
that I've had webloggers infesting my bathroom.

*Now go check out MY OWN weblog.  It's
full of little mass-customization buttons
I can push to do stuff like stick insufferable
cute icons onto my blog. The graphic design on
this sucker are AWFUL.  I know they are.
I could probably fix them, even.  Sort of.
But I ain't gonna.  Cause I don't wanna.
I have no graphic design talent.  I don't
want to pretend I have talent.  Anyone
who expects my blog to manifest graphic
design talent is living in a dreamworld.

*Do drop on by.  Don't be a stranger!

http://blog.wired.com/sterling/
  
## 131 of 131: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 16 Jan 04 20:10

    
This has been a great little jam session; today's the day we end the 
conversation. Thanks to Bruce for exploding our heads for a couple of 
weeks and for doing this every year, like clockwork.

Onward!
  

