inkwell.vue.134 : Bruce Sterling 2002: The State of the Whirled
## 0 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 01 10:07

    
Introductory Hash

Because he's a distributed kind of guy, you can find a broad set of texts 
by and about Bruce Sterling in many (more *and* less visible) virtual 
corners of cyberspace.  Why build an intro from scratch? Here's a set of 
fragments that seem to do the job:

Standard Bio

Bruce Sterling is the author of many books, including The Hacker Crackdown, 
Holy Fire, Heavy Weather, Distraction, and most recently Zeitgeist. With 
William Gibson he co-authored the acclaimed novel The Difference Engine. He 
has written for The New York Times, Newsday, Whole Earth Review, Details, 
Mondo 2000, bOING bOING, Interzone, and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science 
Fiction, and is currently a contributing writer to Wired. The winner of a 
Hugo (for the novelette "Bicycle Repairman"), he is currently working on a 
non-fiction book about beauty, truth, and technology which should appear in 
late 2001. He lives with his wife and two daughters in Austin, Texas.

Some Quotes

(http://www.disinfo.com/pages/article/id817/pg1/, 1/31/02001, Ash Crawford, 
interviewer)

"A 'futurist' is an increasingly old-fashioned thing to be. I don't think 
this has much to do with weariness of subjects or genres, though. I think 
the culture's sense of historical continuity has broken down. There's no 
Progress myth, there's no Titanic Manichean Death Struggle. Societies still 
have a future. That's very obvious, but they've rejected consensus myths of 
The Future. The Future is discredited; no one dares to declare that their 
dreams will surely come true. To declare that the Forces of History favor 
you is seen as 'ideological,' 'fanatical,' 'imperialistic,' 
'phallocentric,' 'anti-market,' 'deterministic,' 'statist,' 'arrogant.' 
Pick your dismissal.

"We're entering a different conception of history, in which Armageddons and 
Utopias are seen as simple-minded. Because they're the same thing: a bogus 
method to stop thinking about the passage of time. In a Utopia, history 
ends because everything's perfect; in an Apocalypse, history ends because 
everyone's dead. The problem here is not that we need pie in the sky or 
death-threats in order to feel awake. The problem is that the clock doesn't 
stop ticking just because we might find that intellectually convenient."


From the Sterling FAQ

http://www.well.com/conf/mirrorshades/sterfaq.html

I finished my second nonfiction book, called TOMORROW NOW. I'm also 
spending a lot of time running a mailing list and website about the 
Greenhouse Effect and postindustrial design. Plus, I write science fiction.

I'm a design groupie. They're a whole lot like really good science fiction 
writers, only with much better shoes.

From the Seminal Viridian Design Speech of 1998

http://www.viridiandesign.org/viridiandesign.htm

"We're Viridian Greens, the Viridian movement. That's because we're green, 
but there's something electrical and unnatural about our tinge of green. 
We're an art movement that looks like a mailing list, an ad campaign, a 
design team, an oppo research organization, a laboratory, and, perhaps most 
of all, we resemble a small feudal theocracy ruled with an iron hand by a 
Pope- Emperor. We have our own logo -- or we will. We have our own font and 
our own typography. And we have an entire list of favorite 
Viridian-approved tie-in products: T-shirts, chrome stickers, socks, solar 
panels, ultrasonic sterilizers, and so on.... We're going to be spending a 
lot of time picking bits and pieces out of the background clutter, and 
assembling them, and placing our stamp of ideological approval upon them. 
The future is already here. It just hasn't been assembled as a cultural 
ensemble."
  
## 1 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 26 Dec 01 10:19

    
As we open this interview, India and Pakistan are pointing nukes at each 
other, and you can feel the itch on those trigger-fingers all the way down 
here in Texas. With that, plus the Afghanistan engagement and chilly 
weather over Palestine, we should probably talk about war...?
  
## 2 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 26 Dec 01 21:50

    

As long as we're hashing, I've won two Hugoes and my new book won't
be out till late 2002, which is just as well as the 21st century
likely started on Sept 11.

It's pretty interesting to see the Titanic Manichean Death Struggle back in
its Al Qaeda guise.  We've got some no kidding, fanatical imperialist
phallocentric characters here, but I don't think they're  all that good at
their work.  They're just too simpleminded.  Bin Laden thinks he's Dr No,
but when you see him at his ease, he comes across like a cross between Aum
Shinri Kyo and a Rasta guru.

An efficient bin Laden wouldn't bother to blow anybody up; he'd probably
keep the handy disguise as the philanthropist to camouflage his world
subversion.  Kinda like Bill Gates.
  
## 3 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 27 Dec 01 05:26

    
(The curse of the Internet: outdated bios persist! For the record, the 
second hugo was for the novelette "Taklamakan.")

Bin Laden reminds me of the Wizard of Oz, the man behind the curtain.  
Except that, in this case, it's not Toto but Tommy Franks and Nic Robertson
that yank the curtain and expose the pile of flesh and fur standing behind
it. More interesting, I think, is the war fervor in the U.S. and elsewhere;
the escalation of intentions as our blood overheats. Conflict really seems
to boil the testosterone over into regions of the brain otherwise content
to eat, sleep, and contemplate emanations from the telly. Is war hell, or
is it sport (especially when mediated by CNN/MSNBC coverage)? GW Bush says
this is a war year: is he shortsighted?  Is it in fact a war *century*?
  
## 4 of 82: virtual community or butter? (bumbaugh) Thu 27 Dec 01 10:20

    
Looking for something else last month, I happened over your closing talk
from CFP98, Bruce. And I thought, "Wow! This guy *is* a futurist!" 'cause
you mentioned anthrax, ad hoc political arrangements, Afghan guerrilas,
"segmented, polycephalous influence networks" and more.

How do you keep yourself not just *aware* of the cultural pulse, but *ahead*
of it?

Looking forward to the new book, too.
  
## 5 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 30 Dec 01 18:49

    

   The secret is in setting my watch forward.  Ha ha ha.

   You wanna read a real futurist, check out this blurb
I just wrote for Jules Verne's latest English-language
translation, INVASION OF THE SEA.

"Mr Verne's latest techno-thriller boldly confronts the  menace of
Islamic terrorism.  He has topnotch chops in technical accuracy, with
endearing dashes of broad humor and a keen eye for telling detail.
Let me be the first to predict this:  someday this French novelist will be
known worldwide!"

And it's true, because Verne's book really *is* about Islamic terrorism,
specifically, French engineers versus fanatic desert saboteurs in
North Africa.  Some "wars" are older than others.  Bin Laden thinks
that war been going on since the 12th century, but, you know, how often
do the rest of us bother to notice?
  
## 6 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 30 Dec 01 21:51

    
We do seem to jump into the fray, when provoked. This latest war has 
weird features, though: it's so open-ended. The enemy's not a nation, 
but a network, and it's in the shadows. We could fight this war for 
years, no? And evolve a kind of Spartan culture, always bulking up for 
the next battle.
  
## 7 of 82: crying "well a day." (vasudha) Mon 31 Dec 01 13:16

    

I've just recieved, "Hubbert's Peak: The impending World Oil Shortage"
by Kenneth S. Deffeyes of Princton for Christmas
and been reading it. And so therefore I can't help
but believe that the impending war(s) around the region of
Saudi Arabia have all to do with the necessity of controling
oil production. Considering qualified academic speicalists in the
field are predicting world oil production will peak within
the next five years, I would assume the major oil suppliers and
oil businessmen would know the same.

Suppliers can fake a shortage when there is none but a supply
cannot be faked. Once we turn that corner everything will change.
  
## 8 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 31 Dec 01 15:06

    

  You wanna read some trippy oil stuff, read Thomas Gold's
"The Deep Hot Biosphere."  In the way of contrarian
science theory, that's probably the weirdest thing I've
read in the past ten years.

   Gold thinks that crude oil is carbonaceous chondrite
material that is embedded throughout the Earth's crust
and oozing *up.*  So if you leave an oil field fallow
long enough, it'll top off again.

   Personally, I doubt that the climate can survive burning
all the oil, so whether we invent some shortages or not
is immaterial.
  
## 9 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 31 Dec 01 15:19

    

   On the war front, I don't see a lot of point in becoming
Spartan in order to fight shadows.  If anything, we're
likely to become spookier.  You end up dressing the Special
Forces as Yankee hippie tourists, and every time they
go click click click with the digital camera, it's off
to Fort Meade with the data.  Once civilians figure out
that they are the primary target for casualties, they're
likely to get pretty enthusiastic about becoming
informants.

   If bin Laden is killed or captured, this "war" per se
will be over, but no matter what happens the Great and
the Good are going to take the New World Disorder a
lot more seriously from now on.  Any place on the
planet that is left to rot will breed narcoterror.
The Powers That Be are going to be imposing
client states on anybody  who doesn't get it
about government.
  
## 10 of 82: jumping the railroad gate (vasudha) Mon 31 Dec 01 17:47

    

<bruces>, as if the civilization isn't poised to
burn all the fossil fuel? After that's done they'll
head for the Rockies and dig them up for the coal.
  
## 11 of 82: Ja'Nell (goldennokomis) Tue 1 Jan 02 10:21

    
It's already been done here in the Appalachians...
  
## 12 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 02 11:32

    
Considering <vasudha>'s response above, based on your view into 'clean 
energy' evolution through your Viridian work and whatever crystal balls 
you might have laying around, do you see any hope for recovery from 
fossil fuel addiction in the short term? It seems to me that there's 
'way more focus on 'clean energy' sources now that there were in years 
past.
  
## 13 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Tue 1 Jan 02 12:31

    
How do you feel about the news blackout surrounding civilian deaths in
Afghanistan?  It seems that a techno fix along the lines of those wingless
angel minicam/cell phone units would come in handy over there right about
now.  I remember something similar in Islands, where "terrorism" is met with
a total news blackout, and I remember feeling like some of the characters
you created had these enormous blind spots because of this policy (the
singapore riot in the soccer stadium where Laura mentions the no-smoking
rule exemplfies this almost autistic perspective)

How relevant is the world you created in Islands in the Net to today's
situation and how do you reconcile this idea of news blackouts as a
counterterroism measure with your idea of information armaments like the
cheap civilian minicam cel phone combination?
  
## 14 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 02 16:37

    

I don't think it's so much a "news blackout" as a
"relevance blackout."  It's not like there's some
 magic number of Afghan civilian casualties where the
Coalition is going to suddenly have a moral qualm about them
and declare "oh well never mind then."   That's not  their mission.

A superpower had its military nerve center blown up.
The US military will not slow down until they feel that
they've severely diminished the chance of a repeat
performance.  Anyone who gets in the way of this will
be shredded.  Every power player of consequence fully
understands this.  Anyone who failed to flee that rain
of vengeance is politically expendable.

Point of view is worth eighty IQ points here.  Afghans
die in droves whether Yankee bombs kill them or not.
There's  also a "news blackout" on Afghanistan's
casualties over the past 30 years, or the past
300 years.   So it's not a question of lives saved; it's
a question of American political culpability.

There is not gonna be a lot of publicity traction
over Afghan civilian casualties, because (a) the carpet-bombing
is over and (b) everybody is sincerely terrified.  So as long as the
vengeful Americans don't go utterly nuts and start incinerating rich people
wholesale, there will be few audible complaints.

The media blackout I'm trying to pierce is the curious one
over bin Laden's most recent tape.  The other one -- that
impromptu confession that was war booty --
that was pored over word by word, but OBL latest
Al Jazeera communique doesn't seem to have an
English transcript on the web.  I'm very interested
in knowing what OBL had to say.  I think there's a good likelihood
that he or various pretenders and impostors will be
popping up with similar genocidal sermons for the next ten
years.

If the War fails to deliver bin Laden's head in a bag,
it's going to dawn on people that Al Qaeda and all the
top Taliban have successfully scarpered, leaving the
Yankees in the position of computer cops who seized the
ISP without arresting the hackers.  If so, that'll change the
tenor of the conflict.
  
## 15 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 1 Jan 02 16:38

    


On the subject of green energy, I'm determinedly optimistic,
but I'm looking toward Europe for progress.  America
is most definitely the Greenhouse Evil Empire.  It's extremely
dangerous to confront America militarily in its current mood.
An economic confrontation will just beggar all parties 1930s
style in the fragile global market.  That leaves environmentalism
as the best and safest arena for othr governments to assert
some sovereignty and initiative and take the Yankee Hyperpower
down a peg.  Maybe something useful can be made to happen.


More likely it'll continue to be mostly eyewash until some
cataclysmic Greenhouse event takes out a chunk of Manhattan.
If that happened tomorrow the Greenhouse compass would turn,
Bush would be greener than green overnight, and  all the delay would be
blamed on Bill Clinton.
  
## 16 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 1 Jan 02 18:02

    
Isn't it more likely that, though, that greenhouse disaster will creep 
slowly enough along that the catastrophe won't be evident before it's 
too late?  That's assuming reduced funding for Arecibo won't result in 
collison with a 'Near Earth Object' before the polar ice caps finish 
melting... 
<http://www.space.com/scienceastronomy/astronomy/arecibo_cuts_011220.html>
  
## 17 of 82: You wanna read some trippy oil stuff (stewartc) Tue 1 Jan 02 22:06

    
In 14, are you saying that adding cheap media feeds from areas of
Afghanistan (and, say, Kasmir, the West Bank, Yemen, etc.) with
civilian casualties will not change the political/military climate? 
How much can it cost to place a dozen live feeds in Kabal, Kandahar,
Mazar-e Sharif, etc. Certainly it's less money than the genetic
engineering operations budget of Greenpeace, cheaper than one cruise
missle. It seems to me that <reid>'s point in 13 is that lots of cheap
media is used as a political tool in Islands, so maybe it's worth
trying in the current war to avoid civilian casualties. Just because
the Pentagon doesn't give a shit, and the "no kidding, fanatical
imperialist phallocentric...simpleminded" terrorists use previously
recorded video, rightfully or not, doesn't mean that lots of micro
feeds from blacked out places might change the political balance.
  
## 18 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Wed 2 Jan 02 05:53

    

The December 11 tape transcript?  From www.robotwisdom.com

Thursday December 27, 10:00 AM

Full text of Osama bin Laden's videotaped comments



DUBAI (Reuters) - Following is a transcript of the videotaped comments of
Osama bin Laden as broadcast by Qatar's al-Jazeera television on Wednesday.

Bin Laden, shown dressed in a camouflage combat smock and with a
submachinegun at his side, spoke in Arabic:


"Three months after the blessed attacks against the international infidels,
against the main infidel America, and after almost two months have passed
since the start of the vicious Crusade against Islam, we would like to talk
about some of the facts that these events have revealed.

"These events have revealed a lot of very important issues to Muslims. It is
very clear that the West in general, spearheaded by America, holds an
indescribable amount of Crusader loathing for Islam, and that those who have
lived all these months under the constant bombing by different types of U.S.
planes know this for a fact.

"How many villages were annihilated without committing any crime? How many,
if we calculate, millions of people were made homeless during the biting
cold, and how many of these oppressed men, women and children are now
sheltering in tents in Pakistan? They have not committed any crime. America
launched this campaign based on a suspicion.

"Those who claim to uphold humanitarian values and freedom, we saw their
true criminal nature. A shell weighing seven grams is sufficient and
actually more than sufficient (to kill) a human being but America, because
it loathes the Taliban and Muslims to such an extent, used on our brothers
on the frontlines projectiles weighing as much as seven tonnes and those who
can calculate know that this is equivalent to seven million grams when seven
grams are sufficient for a human being.

"When the youths, may Allah accept them as martyrs, detonated (the bomb) in
Nairobi less than two tonnes, America said this is a terrorist strike and
this is a weapon of mass destruction. (But) when it uses two bombs each
weighing seven million grams, there is no shame in that.

"And the (U.S.) Minister of Defence comes out after they bombed whole
villages without just cause, just to terrorise people and to make them fear
hosting or coming near Arabs... and he says that this is our right. It is
their right to annihilate people as long as they are Muslims and not
Americans. This is crime in its clearest form. All you hear about (them)
making a mistake, that is a clear lie. A few days ago, they hit what they
claimed were al Qaeda targets in Khost and they directed a missile at a
mosque, although they said they made a mistake. Investigations proved that
Muslim ulema (scholars) were praying Taraweeh (special Ramadan prayers) and
that they had a meeting after the prayers with the hero... Sheikh Jalal al-
Din Haqqani who was one of the most senior mujahideen against the Soviet
occupation and who rejected the U.S. occupation of Afghanistan.

"They hit the mosque while the Muslims were in prayer, killing 150 of them
but Sheikh Jalal survived, may Allah bless his life.

"This is the Crusader loathing, so let those who repeat words without
thinking about its consequences and they say we denounce terrorism. Our
terrorism against the United States is blessed, aimed at repelling the
oppressor so that America stops its support for Israel."

(yahoo news Singapore)
  
## 19 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 02 06:23

    
Since we're talking prediction, we could also consider Pat Buchanan's 
new book, _The Death of the West : How Mass Immigration, Depopulation & 
A Dying Faith Are Killing Our Culture and Country_.

From Publisher's Weekly: "Fearful that America is being
'de-Christianized,' Buchanan argues that 'while the prognosis is not
good,' America must reevaluate itself and reclaim its white, Christian
origins; despite the current 'coarseness of her manners, the decadence
of her culture, or the sickness in her soul,' the nation is worth
saving."
  
## 20 of 82: democracy being a left thing, anyway (ludlow) Wed 2 Jan 02 08:53

    
that's certainly ugly
  
## 21 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 02 10:15

    

  Thanks a lot  for the transcript, but surely that's not
half an hour's worth of rambling, even in Arabic.
Where's the rest of it?

  I don't think "cheap video feed" helps much unless
there is some context for response.  For instance,
a lot of people die of lung cancer, and you could
put "cheap video feed" into cancer wards, but
would this cause smokers to change their behavior?

    I didn't stop smoking until I couldn't stop
coughing.  Then, yeah, I managed to quit, but
there are plenty of people who don't and can't.

  Maybe if I'd had cheap video feed of the inside
of my own lungs in real-time...  But to think
that cheap video feed would stop the US from
bombing Al Qaeda...  All they have to do to
counter such a feeble act of propaganda is to
turn up the amps from the images of mayhem
at Ground Zero -- some o' those *expensive,
nicely produced* video feeds.

   One Geraldo on wholly-owned Fox News
is likely worth about 100 little NGO guys with
shouldercams.  So if the hundred start
"changing the political balance" in some
annoying way, why not restore the lost balance
by just buying and deploying another Geraldo?

   I doubt that OBL is winning  many
recruits by complaining about how big the
Yankees' bombs are.  It's the same kind of
category error, really. Yeah brother, the enemy
controls huge, centralized industries that
manufacture really big bombs.  That's kind
of the point, actually.  The Yankees don't
have big bombs because they have huge amounts
of emotional rage against Islam.  They built the bombs
that way because of the economies of scale, a phenomenon
that the Koran doesn't address.  The guys who are throwing
those things out of the backs of B-52s, they're  probably listening
to techno music on headphones.
  
## 22 of 82: Life in the big (doctorow) Wed 2 Jan 02 10:20

    
Bruce, have you seen part two of Patrick Farley's online comic, "The
Spiders?" (http://e-sheep.com/spiders/02/) He draws up a very nice skiffy
universe of streaming footage from Afghanistan and posits some interesting
applications for same.
  
## 23 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Wed 2 Jan 02 13:10

    

The argument that US bombing is state terror and worse than the idealistic
terror of the "little guy" has been compelling in a lot of other
situations, and will appeal to a lot of people in this situation too.  

The size of the bombs is just a metaphor.  

Looking at that transcript I'm thinking those guys are still trying to 
have the moral appeal of the intifada, citizens with stones versus occupying 
forces with guns.  Size is very important, and "ours is smaller" wins in
that argument.  Something the US is not used to countering, you know.  
It would be good to see the rest of the transrcripts, but that segment
seemed provocative to me.  I know GW Bush said he found it boring.

Bruce, I happened to have a NY Times on a flight yesterday, and found myself
reading the captions and notes on the weather page.   I found something
slightly alarming.

Though the advantage of more recorded weather records might be 
that "average" has more data, the NY Times noted that "average" 
temperatures were previously based on 1961-1990 but would henceforth be 
based on 1971-2000.  

I'm assuming that now "cooler than average" may mean "warmer than what
average meant to old farts who have been around for more than three
decades."   And that disturbs my Viridian sensibility.
  
## 24 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 2 Jan 02 14:20

    

You think that's heavy, check out this New Yorker article.

http://www.newyorker.com/FACT/?020107fa_FACT
  
## 25 of 82: Craig Newmark (cnewmark) Wed 2 Jan 02 17:49

    

This is just to thank Bruce for two ideas which we're
trying to make real.

In Holy Fire, he observes that emerging biotech may greatly
exacerbate the difference between medical have and have-nots.

I have a friend with an emerging genomics startup that might
be a big deal... and we talk about how they can give away some
technology that might be substantial.  I've offered even to 
buy cheap gene-crunchers for grad students up the street at UCSF
if it makes sense.  ("the street" is Parnassus in SF, where the
novel's protagonist initially lives.)  Whether or not something
really happens, I don't know... but I think I can find a way
to inject this, meme-style, into local media.

In Distraction, there's a nomadic, high-tech tribe which
governs by reputation system online.  In the craigslist
discussion boards, we're quietly putting in the underpinnings
of something like that.  It'll be a long effort, and there's
lots of ways to go nowhere ... but we've put in some fraud 
protection right at the beginning, which might make for success.

All this says is that Bruce's work is more influential than
usually credited.

All of this might go somewhere, maybe not... but we're persistent.


thanks!

Craig
  
## 26 of 82: Fuzzy Logic (phred) Wed 2 Jan 02 18:49

    
Slashdot has a large accumulation of experience on reputation ranking now.
Much more sophisticated in its own way than artificial worlds like Advogato
with its ludicrous cross of Mutual Admiration Society and Apprenticeship
Ladder.  Anyway, both sites are surviving, albeit with some bruises.

But I digress.  Bruce, the question on the minds of the faithful flock:
is the Viridian Green movement dead or is the Pope-Emperor just on
sabbatical?  We definitely need something to help the enviro movement 
save itself from its tendencies toward humorlessness and a lack of design
sense that is rivaled only by its corporate antagonists.
  
## 27 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 02 19:41

    
The Viridian notes are still coming, the last was December 30. Check out 
http://www.viridiandesign.org.
  
## 28 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 2 Jan 02 19:51

    
... and here's the link to the latest Viridian note:
http://www.viridiandesign.org/notes/251-300/00289_the_world_is_becoming_uninsurable_revisited.html

Check out entries for the Enron Logo Contest, which seems to've hit a 
nerve.

Good question, though: what's up with the Viridian Design Movement? Are 
you seeing cases (other than the contests) where designers show clear 
Viridian influence? Has anybody put together a Viridian exhibit?
  
## 29 of 82: Steve Cassidy (cassidy) Thu 3 Jan 02 06:04

    
The thing about Afghan civilian casualties is whirlwind-reaping for
terrorists: once your armies don't wear uniforms, the civilians who
surround them are at risk. Bulk drops of the latest $4,000 Sony email
capable camcorder into the Hindu Kush won't change that - and I find it
kinda ironic that this discussion has another thread about being
green, while simultaneously describing the least green, least
important, most impractical, most wasteful method of not fixing the
problem of people dying right now!

A civilian filmed dying on a webcam is still, after all, dead.

As for that Bin Laden snippet: even allowing for the overly pompous
structure of public speech in Arabic (as translated: maybe the
translators are pompous...) - if I was a streetwise arab looking at
those words, I'd be thinking "he didn't use 7 grams to kill specific
men in America" and "most of the people who died in Africa were not
American and not Crusaders".

Arabs can spot dangerous lunatics just as well as the rest of us, if
not better: the flip-side the the 'civilian identification' problem in
Afghanistan can be seen from the uncontrolled, military-approved
footage showing former Tali-Tubbies shaving like crazy the minute the
climate went against them: the entire 'arab problem' is that Arabs seem
not to form large, persistent, treaty-holding societies. This may mean
that they are 'freer' than Americans, from some points of view...
  
## 30 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 3 Jan 02 12:02

    

Afghans are not Arabs, but the fluidity of alliances there, at least, is
an interesting point. Do you say this from observation and interaction
with Arab people, or from media & interpretation alone?
  
## 31 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 02 13:40

    

I dote on Viridian stuff, but it's only my hobby.  I have to earn
a living just like  the other pampered Yankee kulturkrats,
and at the moment that seems to involve a whole shitload
of military stuff.  I'm even expecting the imminent
arrival of some *security clearance documents.*  It'll
be kinda interesting to know if cyberpunk sci-fi writers
can even *get* a federal security clearance.

I bet Gibson can't get one.  He's Canadian.  Heh heh heh.

Viridian is three years old now, and it mutters along
at about the same pace as my other online crusade,
Dead Media Project, once did.  I'm not gonna be hurried
into the point of burnout.  I'm just going to contribute
what I can, as I can, until the happy day comes when I declare
victory and find something else to obsess about.

If I get a lot of money and some spare time, I'll pick
up the pace some.  But really, Viridian is a small
public-outreach deal compared to writing novels;
the number of people on that list is miniscule compared
to the number who will go out and buy a Bruce Sterling
book.
  
## 32 of 82: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 3 Jan 02 14:59

    
But perhaps the Viridian websites get more traffic?  Since your
dispatches are all on the web, why join the list?
  
## 33 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 02 17:52

    
Possibly because it takes the Viridian gremlin a day or two to add the 
latest note to the site? If you want it NOW, join the list!

Bruce, what's the Viridian website traffic like? The site was 
slashdotted lately; did a bunch of new people join the list at that 
point? Or was there a sustained increase in the number of people viewing 
new Viridian notes?
  
## 34 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 3 Jan 02 21:10

    

   Well, a lot of people on Slashdot extracted a speech
of particular interest to Slashdotters, and we did
a flood of join-ups, but tht's not a heavily trafficked
site.  It's no Robot Wisdom.

   A lot of people read email who rarely websurf.
They are two different media really, and email is
the more topical.  People respond to a request I
send over email, while a request on a website
is scarcely noticed and if people do respond.
they respond months late.

    With close to 2,000 people, Viridian is the
biggest list I've ever run.  It used to be
a lot more intimate than it is, and I miss
that quality. Email lists don't scale very
gracefully.
  
## 35 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 3 Jan 02 22:19

    
At the beginning of this topic, there's a quote from your interview with 
Ashley Crawford:

"We're entering a different conception of history, in which Armageddons
and Utopias are seen as simple-minded. Because they're the same thing: a
bogus method to stop thinking about the passage of time. In a Utopia,
history ends because everything's perfect; in an Apocalypse, history
ends because everyone's dead. The problem here is not that we need pie
in the sky or death-threats in order to feel awake. The problem is that
the clock doesn't stop ticking just because we might find that
intellectually convenient."

... and in post 19, I mentioned Pat Buchanan's shaggy apocalypse story, 
_The Death of the West_, which is more about the postmodern evaporation 
of Christian dogma... but it's kind of apocalyptic. 

I was thinking it would be cool to create a top-ten list of apocalyptic
characters and scenes from recent history... one might be Jim Jones and
the whacky mass suicide at Guyana, another might be Koresh et al at
Waco. Osama bin Laden should be in there, and Tim McVeigh. Heaven's 
Gate. Bhopal. Chernobyl. Ray Milland in "Panic in Year Zero..." 

What am I leaving out?
  
## 36 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 02 06:17

    
...and here's something completely different: Cory Doctorow has written 
a *crucial* short piece on the state of the Internet, which is posted at 
<http://www.oreillynet.com/lpt/a//network/2001/12/21/2002.html>.

Here's an excerpt, actually the last three summary paragraphs:

"Providing circuit-grade reliability over a public-switched network is
too expensive to make a go of it. Providing stand-alone-PC-grade
reliability in a Web-services world of uncoordinated actors is too
expensive to make a go of it. Providing DSL-grade connectivity over
802.11 is too expensive to make a go of it.

"The next generation of Internet entrepreneurs will be people who
understand this. They'll be working to provide unreliable services that
work in concert with other unreliable services to provide a service that
works on average, but not predictably at any given moment. They'll
challenge the received wisdom that customers are hothouse flowers,
expensive to acquire and prone to wilting at the first sign of trouble.  
These entrepreneurs will build services that are so compelling that
they'll be indispensable, worth using even if the service flakes out
when you want it the most.

"The close-enough-for-rock-n-roll revolution is a-comin' -- to the
streets, comrades!"

The name of the piece is "2002: The Carpetbaggers Go Home." 
  
## 37 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 02 10:36

    

  Yeah, after the Revolution, things will be different.
Not *better* -- just different.

     The key to guys like Koresh and Jones, and probably
bin Laden, is that suicide offers a final solution to a
melodrama that is showing its age.  It's like:
we liberated Afghanistan, we created a holy Umma,
we wrapped the local crank in the cape of the Prophet,
yet everybody's starving.  How long is this supposed to go
on? The clock's ticking, we're losing our grip here and
the mesmeric romance is fading.

Why not blow up New York?  At least the flames will
camouflage the squalor of our own dysfunction.

Guys in law enforcement like to refer to this as
"suicide by cop."
  
## 38 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 02 10:49

    
But are they really starving? I hear that, but I see televised images 
that seem to show healthy kids and adults, and I hear that, when it was 
raining food packages, they were picking only the stuff they especially 
liked and leaving the rest to the wind. Starving people usually aren't 
so picky.

All the world's a stage, and the people on it merely players hoping for 
the next sound byte...
  
## 39 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 02 10:49

    

Guys who are big Internet activists have a problem
with the Internet showing its age.  They are really
emotionally invested in it, and have a hard time
envisioning it as corny, or past-it, or showing
its inherent limits.  Or as a dead medium someday,
like the telegraph.

A lot of heavy people came out of the subculture
of telegraphy.  Thomas Edison was a telegrapher.
Even Gene Autry the cowboy star was a telegrapher.
There are decades of plays and movies where
a uniformed guy busting in with a telegram is
a key dramatic moment.  The telegraph was
very important and  had a very good
run for a technology, but it wasn't a permanent
revolution.  The sense of wonder has a short
shelf-life.

The technological sublime is a long-term social
phenomenon, but it manifests itself in glossy hardware
that ages  as quickly as a supermodel.
  
## 40 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 4 Jan 02 10:51

    

  I don't doubt that people in Afghanistan are starving.
It's a nation of subistence agriculture with
a three year drought and a ruined shipping infrastructure.
It makes sense.
  
## 41 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 4 Jan 02 10:55

    

With the added attraction that if you could create the conditions for heroic
cultural martydom, people might be inspired by you for years or centuries.
The man who started the true jihad.  

Aside from what you really believe heaven will have in store for your
devotion.  On more tee-shirts than Che, no need to prove that an Islamic
government makes things better for more than the elite of the Talaban,
and paradise for you personally in the afterlife. A souped-up version of 
suicide-by-cop and one hell of a motive to lob the biggest explosion you 
can muster at Goliath, while maintaining the stance of the simple 
hero with the slingshot, standing with the innocent and the faithful,
just asking for furious overreation in response.   Babies named after you
for decades if you pull it off...          
  
## 42 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 4 Jan 02 11:02

    
(That was posted in response to <37> while three other posts slipped 
in ahead of mine, messing up the context.)
  
## 43 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 4 Jan 02 13:03

    
There's a relevant piece in today's New York Times:
http://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/04/international/asia/04AID.html

Evidently relief agencies have averted famine so far, but local warlords 
are beginning to steal much of the food once it gets there... business 
as usual now that the Taliban's been uprooted.

Back to the interview... you have a new book due sometime this year, 
_Tomorrow Now_.  Speculative nonfiction, I take it. Can you tell us 
something about it?
  
## 44 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 02 10:49

    

   *Well, it's more like TOMORROW ELEVEN MONTHS FROM NOW,
but I still have chances to tinker with it, and I plan
to do so.

   It's about seven aspects of the early 21st century
and how they make this century distinctive from other
cultural epochs.  I figured it was about time for
me to write a straight0out futurist pundit book.
I'll pbobably be a lot wiser ten years from now,
but I doubt I'll have the energy to go through a
work so sprawling and rambunctious.

   Tomorrow Now's Chapter Four, the military chapter,
is looking especially prescient at the moment,
but I think the high point of the book is probably
Chapter Three on postindustrial design.  I'd much
rather hang out with designers than soldiers.
  
## 45 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 02 10:53

    
What are you learning from your forays into the design world?
  
## 46 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 5 Jan 02 15:25

    

  Mostly that it's a whole hell of a lot harder
to actually make products than it is to sit
around thinking them up.

   I'm reminded of my early forays into the literary
world.  It's harder to write sell and publish a novel
than it is to come up with great ideas for books.
Hell, I've got *thousands* of great ideas for books.
Quite commonly I'll stuff ten or twelve of them
into *one* book.
  
## 47 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 5 Jan 02 19:49

    
Do you get into the business side at all (selling and publishing)? Or do 
you do the creative stuff and leave the rest to your agent and 
publisher?
  
## 48 of 82: Pierce Presley (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 02 06:28

    
Email from Pierce Presley:

I think many of the problems with mainstream media's coverage of the
Afghan campaign (if this is a war on terrorism, there will more) stem
more from their cheerleader attitude than their acquiescence to the
administration's gatekeeping. Every time I turn on the networks, its the
same news from the same places, and a moment's study of a good map lets
you know the reporters are talking about events miles from them;  
dissident opinions (and they do exist) either are dismissed or
disrespected; experts talk and talk and talk without answering basic
questions about civilian casualties, infrastructure damage and long-term
plans. The homogenization of American media (one newspaper per town,
maybe four local news station connected to a network, two viable radio
news networks, a dearth of relevant Internet sites) means that those who
might take a different view have no reason to do so. Publicly traded
media (those at the mercy of stockholders used to ridiculous profit
margins) won't do anything to antagonize their advertisers, since that
will lower profits. Look at the layoffs, buyouts and other reductions at
media companies in the midst of the top story since the fall of
communism.

Part of the problem with the proposed solution (independent, low-cost
media) is that, as Mr. Sterling has pointed out, it isn't everybody who
can produce competent media -- or, as I like to put it, strapping a
camcorder to a dog doesn't make him a videographer. One solution might
be to try and increase the number of media outlets built on the St.
Petersburg Times/Poynter Institute model: the newspaper/TV station/radio
station/Web site owned by a non-profit corporation. While this certainly
doesn't remove the profit motive from the business, it helps keep the
popularity contest under control. Now, at last, to my questions for Mr.
Sterling. How much does media feed the current war frenzy (I'm including
advertising, which can't sell hemorrhoid pads, seemingly, without using
the flag)? How will the reduction in media competition affect both
America and the world as we continue into the new millennium? Do you see
any hope for independent media outlets, especially outside urban
centers?
 
  
## 49 of 82: Steve Cassidy (cassidy) Sun 6 Jan 02 07:22

    
Umm, that bit about Afghanistan being a subsistence-agriculture
economy... you do know that now the peace has been restored and the
Taliban deposed, the farmers are going back to growing the two crops
that are their traditional mainstay?

Opium poppies, and Cannabis...

That is, they will in the spring, when all the people who normally get
out of the mountains and into Pakistan for the bad weather come back
and work in the fields for cash...
  
## 50 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 02 11:41

    


 Do you get into the business side at all (selling and publishing)? Or do
 you do the creative stuff and leave the rest to your agent and
 publisher?

*Well, one is pretty much obliged to get into promotional aspects,
the book tour, publicity photos and so on. But I've got next to
nothing to do with putting ink on paper.  At the moment, the
worst sore in the publishing industry is the collapse of its
distribution system.  I've never been anywhere near distribution.
I very much doubt I ever will be.  It's got about as much to
do with writing novels as casting polyvinyl resin has got to do with
playing an electric guitar.


"Now, at last, to my questions for Mr.
 Sterling. How much does media feed the current war frenzy (I'm including
 advertising, which can't sell hemorrhoid pads, seemingly, without using
 the flag)?"

*Al Qaeda really likes media.  A lot of people have commented on
bin Laden's apparent personal vanity; the shouldercam guy in constant tow,
the nice selection of hats, the obligatory Kalashnikov that's in every
shot, the symbiotic Al Jazeera thing....  Arab-Chechnyan rebel  Khottab
has also got a very calculated public image; he coined the phrase
"Jihad of the Media" and sports a cool beret and Che Guevara ringlets.

*Clearly the choice of attack targets was meant to compel overwhelming
media attention; they weren't killing 3,000 stockbrokers at random,
they chose very large symbolic targets in a city that is a world
capital of the global diaspora.   As for blowing up the Pentagon,
that guaranteed a US military response no matter what the media
said or did.

How will the reduction in media competition affect both
 America and the world as we continue into the new millennium?

*That probably depends on how many of these princes of media
get thrown off the edge of a boat a la Robert Maxwell.  One has to
wonder why the Sept 11 attacks didn't cut to the chase and attack
CNN HQ in Atlanta.  Presumably they still take Wall Street more
seriously as a global player than they do AOL-Time Warner.
One has to wonder why.

 Do you see
 any hope for independent media outlets, especially outside urban
 centers?

*I dunno what the "urban center" thing has to do with it.
A media outlet proclaims itself "independent" when it's independent
of the customary structures of mainstream finance, but
they're always dependent on *something* -- very few people
choose to wander around at random, spreading news, without
some motivating agenda.  And of course I see hope.  I've met
guys who were Charter 77 dissidents into Czech samizdat,
guys who could do years in a slammer for a Bible or an
underground comic.  The counterculture always shines
brighter as the mainstream becomes more stupefied
and predictable.

*During the Afghan dust-up, I've been paying a lot of attention
to Indian media.  The Indians are even less free of the institutional
interests of the RAW than US media is of those of the CIA,
but they have a large enough audience to budget some serious
research and to pay journalists of talent.

If the US media is in a blind rah-rah mode, well, read the media from
offshore. It's the high point of globalization -- you can import other
people's dissidence from the local shibboleths.

*I tried reading the Pakistani media, but they've reached
such a state of social and ideological collapse that
they make even Fox News look good.


" Umm, that bit about Afghanistan being a subsistence-agriculture
 economy... you do know that now the peace has been restored and the
 Taliban deposed, the farmers are going back to growing the two crops
 that are their traditional mainstay?  Opium poppies, and Cannabis..."

*Sure.  All lawless areas become narcotics producers nowadays.  You
can't eat opium and cannabis, though.  Nor are you likely to
pull down much cash from the warlords who retail the stuff.
And if there's a crop-killing drought, you're gonna starve right in the
middle of your poppy field.
  
## 51 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 02 13:31

    
You have to wonder how they can build any kind of economy. I suppose the 
U.S. could pay them to stop growing poppies, but that's not a real 
solution. They need industry, agricultural diversity, and infrastructure 
to support an evolving business environment. 
  
## 52 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 6 Jan 02 15:26

    

I don't underestimate the trouble in surviving the
modern world without schools, roads and plumbing.
There's a little cash in drugs, banditry, and prostitution,
but running arms requires too much literacy.

There are big patches of Africa that turned their backs on modernity
and walked right off the map, but they never made it
back to any tribal life of village farming.  They marched
straight into the bony arms of AIDS, voodoo militias and blood
diamonds.

You can get into your Wooden Ships on the Water
and try to sail back to the Garden, but I don't know
where the hell you're supposed to land.
  
## 53 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 6 Jan 02 17:09

    
For my global warming piece in the Viridian issue of Whole Earth 
Magazine, I interviewed Jim White, director of Environmental Sciences at 
the University of Colorado at Boulder. I think this exchange is relevant 
to our discussion:

>>>
Jon Lebkowsky: One point that John Firor makes is that with six billion 
people on earth, if everyone had the same standard of living that we 
[Americans] have, there's no way that we could sustain.

James White: Yes, that's very clear.  I teach a course on energy. That's 
just one of the resources that you'd need, and if you do the 
calculations, we use thirty times the energy the average African does. 
We use ten to fifteen times the average energy that people do in general 
developing countries overall. We're 250 million, they're 6 billion 
people. You bring them all up to our standard of living, and the 
multiplication factor for energy, for aluminum, tin, lead, all the other 
resources we need is just enormous.  It's probably on the order of a 
hundred, or something like that - I've never done the calculation. But 
there's no way that I could see that we could support six billion 
consumers of the American type, or even six billion consumers of the 
Western European type, and they use half the resources we do.
<<<
  
## 54 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Sun 6 Jan 02 19:41

    

A standard of living like that of Western Europe is a little rich, don't you
think?  I wonder at what point the birth rate drops to something managable
due to an increase in the standard of living.

I have to take issue with the idea that these suicidal acts are an attempt
to cover up a bankrupt ideology.  That doesn't make sense, and it seems that
this illusion is as dangerous as the back-to-the-land illusion of dropouts
and downshifters.  A revolutionary suicide can galvanize a population -
these acts do not seem like acts of hopelessness and desperation.

Also, the spectre of Western culpability is present in each of those
examples, be it diamond mines, AIDS, or tribal war.  It's there to greet you
as you step off the plane regardless of your destination.  What I find
disheartening is that admission of this culpability is seen as an admission
of weakness when it could be used to initiate dialogue.
  
## 55 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 7 Jan 02 15:43

    




 A standard of living like that of Western Europe is a little rich, don't
you
 think?  I wonder at what point the birth rate drops to something managable
 due to an increase in the standard of living.

*That's a good question.  Demographics are where it's at.

 I have to take issue with the idea that these suicidal acts are an attempt
 to cover up a bankrupt ideology.  That doesn't make sense, and it seems
that
 this illusion is as dangerous as the back-to-the-land illusion of dropouts
 and downshifters.  A revolutionary suicide can galvanize a population -
 these acts do not seem like acts of hopelessness and desperation.

*Well, I'd worry a lot *more* about Al Qaeda if they were Islamic
zealots who were turning Afghanistan into an industrial power.
It's true that "the blood of martyrs is the seed of the Church" and
all that, but nobody is ever gonna be more selflessly dedicated
and suicidal than a Japanese kamikaze pilot, and what did it get them?

*The world's top revolutionary suicides aren't Islamic, they're
from the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a crowd that is rather
little known despite many bloody offenses.  The "population" can
get "galvanized" again and again and again, but unless the society
gets some kind of coherent grip on the means of production and
information, it's just an empty spectacle of human sacrifice.

 Also, the spectre of Western culpability is present in each of those
 examples, be it diamond mines, AIDS, or tribal war.  It's there to greet
you
 as you step off the plane regardless of your destination.

*I agree, but "spectres of culpability" can float right through keyholes;
they can go anywhere and cover any issue.  The influence of the West
has been planetary for decades  now.  When a Coca Cola bottler
is the President of Mexico, it's a little late to go chase off the
imperialistas with a righteous machete.  It's like fussing about the spectre
of ancient Greek culpability -- I mean, surely all our
social, intellectual and political difficulties can be traced straight back
to Aristotle and Plato, somehow...  Shouldn't we take action?  Maybe
we should car-bomb Athens!

 What I find
 disheartening is that admission of this culpability is seen as an admission
 of weakness when it could be used to initiate dialogue.

*That's when the West is at its most overwhelming... when it
shows up with the NGO guys to "initiate" that "dialogue."  If the West just
blitzkrieged in to shovel all the locals into death camps, they'd be
rigidly resisted, but the soft cultural power has turned out to be
by far the better strategy.

*By the time the tribal guy get it about the structure of a rational
political  argument, it's all over.  He can debate the paradigm all he
likes, but
his kids will graduate from Columbia U.

*It turns out that those half-Westernized diaspora guys,
the sons of globalization, are the ones with all the money and all
the get-up and go.  We're not fighting the benighted traditionalists
in bin Laden's home town; we're fighting wannabe-fundamentalists,
a cult of offshore daredevil adventurers, like the Flying Tigers
or the Lafayette Escadrille.
  
## 56 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 02 16:16

    
What looked like the Third World War has devolved into a relatively 
boring media circus, with soldiers in the first ring, politicians in the 
second, and administrative bureaucrats getting set to wander into the 
third, calculators and palm pilots in hand.
  
## 57 of 82: Linda Castellani (castle) Mon 7 Jan 02 19:10

    

I'm concerned about this teenaged suicide pilot in Florida.  What are we 
to make of this?  Is a trend?  The Trenchcoat Mafia in aviator jackets?
  
## 58 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 02 20:14

    
Salon has a piece about Afghans who are starving:
http://www.salon.com/news/wire/2002/01/07/bonavash/index.html

U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said in New York that the WFP has received
reports of starvation in remote villages. "The agencies have managed to
get record amounts of food into Afghanistan but then getting it from
depots to remote villages where it is most needed has not been easy," he
said.

"With different warlords controlling different roads, there are some
areas where we just can't go," said WFP spokeswoman Abby Spring. "We
have the food, the cash, the trucks, but what we don't have is the
security which makes it difficult, if not imposible, to provide food to
some communities."
  
## 59 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 7 Jan 02 20:15

    
I forgot to put those last two paragraphs in quotes.
  
## 60 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Tue 8 Jan 02 06:15

    

Samuel Mockbee died last week.  Have you written anything on this guy yet,
Bruce.  What do you think about his architecture?  Here's a Salon article on
the man: http://www.salon.com/people/conv/2001/08/09/mockbee/
  
## 61 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 02 09:26

    


  Well, I liked Mockbee's line about architects having
to be "more than house pets for the rich."  Still,
for every one of those cool recycled bungalows he made
out of used whatchamacallits, the American South
bought about a hundred thousand house trailers.

They're interesting structures in the way of
poverty housing, those house trailers.  I have
no doubt that Huckleberry Finn's alcoholic dad
would be living in one nowadays.

It's kind of the central theme of industrialism -- Bauhaus
guys come up with really cool ideological themes for civilized living,
but by the time they implement one, there are
vast Las Vegas suburbs covered with tickytacky.
  
## 62 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 8 Jan 02 09:28

    



 "With different warlords controlling different roads, there are some
 areas where we just can't go," said WFP spokeswoman Abby Spring. "We
 have the food, the cash, the trucks, but what we don't have is the
 security which makes it difficult, if not impossible, to provide food to
 some communities."

*That's a weird way to frame the problem.  As if "security"
were something you could get off a truck. The road bandits and
the starving people are in a symbiotic relationship, whose very
function is to to keep civilization at bay.

*Some vulnerable grunt with boots and a bayonet has to impose civil order by
wearily chasing wily guerrillas from pillar to post.  You can't just get a
pint of security FedExed in.  Once it becomes a people's war, you'll shoot
them
at night as you feed them by day.

* "Security" implies a pacification program, with road patrols,
secured villages, land mines, ambushes, the Soviet occupation
nine yards...  A lot of guys in zinc coffins, and most likely,
eventual defeat.   The US military doesn't want to face that scenario,
any more than they wanted to install MPs in Baghdad.

*It really is starting to look like Gulf War Two.  The cannon
fodder troops were mashed flat in short order, while the malefactors
live to chuckle on.  Who's taking bets that Omar and Bin Laden will
be lively threats long after Bush leaves office?

* Bin Laden has got the initiative again, it's his move.  He's had a run
of bad luck lately:  he could have massacred the Indian Parliament,
assassinated Tommy Franks in his helicopter, and blown up an American
civilian aircraft with a shoebomb -- but all three schemes crapped out.  If
the odds had favored him, we'd be reeling right now.

*Still, terrorist attacks suffer even more SNAFUs than conventional military
operations, so that's a constraint he'll have to live and die with.

*I'd be betting a new videotape.  Quite likely he's already mailed it.
  
## 63 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Tue 8 Jan 02 09:40

    

Word.  That sounds like a networking problem.  I wonder how long it took to
find all of the car windows to make this civic center
http://www.smithsonianmag.si.edu/smithsonian/issues01/oct01/images/mockbee_masons_bend_jpg.html
  
## 64 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 8 Jan 02 21:21

    
I'm not betting on bin Laden's persistence. On the latest video, he 
looked like death warmed over. But terrorists as a species are no more 
likely to disappear than serial killers.
  
## 65 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Wed 9 Jan 02 05:57

    

Slippage!  My 63 is about Mockbee and recycling!  I've been arguing with
everyone regardign the futility of wasting time thinking about who conducted
these actions and instead concentrating on who stands to benefit from them,
ultimately.  A few years ago I was entertaining the fantasy of the military
as some sort of vestigial limb that society was just about ready to shed.
Gosh, what a pipe dream that seems now.

So, I think that maybe concentrating on who stands to benefit from the
current situation as it has devolved is important.  Does having a Bin Ladin
Boogeyman on the loose give our government an excuse to militarize the
world?
  
## 66 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 9 Jan 02 09:13

    

  I think bin Laden looked like death warmed over because
he'd just spent a month fasting for Ramadan.

   Terrorism tends to be counterproductive, so its "ultimate
beneficiaries" are often the victims.  Bin Laden's a terrorist,
but I doubt that's his first choice as a historical actor;
given his druthers, he'd rather be Genghis Khan.  Back
in the good old days, Luddites had real military advantages;
you could ride out of the hills in a horde, overrun
those pampered merchants in the cities and just stack up
their heads in heaps.
  
## 67 of 82: Rafe Colburn (rafeco) Wed 9 Jan 02 10:58

    
 The degree to which people "fast" for Ramadan varies.  They don't eat
or drink between like 5am and 5pm, but they oftentimes feast once the
sun goes down.  Of course, I doubt UBL was in able to do much feasting
hiding in the caves of Tora Bora or wherever the hell he was when he
made the tape.
  
## 68 of 82: Mike Godwin (mnemonic) Wed 9 Jan 02 19:33

    

I think Bin Laden has been wounded and was concealing the wound (his
left arm doesn't appear in the last video).
  
## 69 of 82: Linda Castellani (castle) Wed 9 Jan 02 23:11

    

Yes.  We think so, too.
  
## 70 of 82: democracy being a left thing, anyway (ludlow) Thu 10 Jan 02 06:34

    
Isn't he supposed to be on kidney dialysis?
  
## 71 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 02 07:42

    
Whatever the case, his health wasn't the best.

Could he possibly become a martyr now? It seems his popular following's 
evaporating.
  
## 72 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Thu 10 Jan 02 11:06

    
What evidence do you see for that, Jon?
  
## 73 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 10 Jan 02 11:35

    

People said Saddam Hussein's following was evaporating too.
He's also commonly said to be sick.  Maybe both things are
true, but that doesn't mean that Saddam is over.

Bin Laden's t-shirt trade would boom immediately,
if he could pull off another slaughter of Americans to rival
September 11.  He needs a tactical victory followed by a taunting,
eloquent video.   He needs another burst of revolutionary charisma,
he needs a triumphant return from Elba.  With those, he'd be big again
overnight.   Probably bigger than before, thanks to the psychological
recoil.

Unless he's deathly sick or the cops are really good, time may be on bin
Laden's side.  His being alive and un-findable is an unscratchable itch.
The British want Tony to go home and fix the railroads.  George W. has given
us the same partial, haunted victory that his Dad did.

The Mujihadeen evaporated because they realized it makes no sense to be
daisy-cuttered when you don't get to shoot any Yankees.   The Iraqis did it
too.  Lawrence of Arabia's following would have done the same thing.  They
discouraged fast, but they could encourage fast, too.

They were hoping to be ritually dragging dead Americans behind the jeeps,
like they did in Somalia.  They never had the opportunity for  Soviet-Afghan
style ambushes, because the US didn't offer it to them.  That doesn't mean
they've forgotten how to do it.

   I would very much like to think that bin Laden really was deathly sick,
or running critically low on charisma, and he decided to blow it all in a
suicide-by-cop.   He'd been at it for a decade or more, so maybe he got
tired, bored or desperate.  But after our best shot at him, bin Laden is
alive, and so is most of his inner cadre.  Even Omar is still on the loose.
The downside of the American war by proxy is that the proxies are buffers
for both sides.  Omar is being protected by people who shaved their beards,
burned their intelligence files and are waiting for the Yankees to get bored
and leave.

    They still have fangs.  The Moodge have still got enough moxie to
brazenly assault the Indian Parliament, and bring the world closer to a
nuclear war than it's been since the Cuban Missile Crisis.    It's hard to
imagine what Pakistan would look like after an Indo-Pak nuclear war, but
those hardscrabble radioactive wastelands would likely look pretty familiar,
even comforting, to illiterate Afghan bandits on horseback.

        So if bin Laden could do what the net.war guys call "sustainable
pulsing," just create some blood-red, destabilizing major headlines once a
year or so, for the next ten years, then he could still win the War on
Terror.    We would likely never admit the defeat, but his victory condition
is pretty clear.  It's an unlivable, genocidal Israel, a suppurating,
Luddite Islam pockmarked with huge bombs but devoid of CNN and McDonald's,
and enough oil and dope money to keep the mullahs fed.
  
## 74 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 10 Jan 02 22:32

    
Another alternative: assume bin Laden isn't the conceptual victor... what 
does the world look like in that case?
  
## 75 of 82: Mike Godwin (mnemonic) Fri 11 Jan 02 05:33

    

Isn't the longstanding problem going to be the asymmetry between the
effort it takes to cause terrorism and the effort it takes to prevent it?

Other people besides bin Laden are going to have that insight.
  
## 76 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Fri 11 Jan 02 09:33

    
Good point.  We spent the soviets into submission.  Can't do that with
enemies who don't have to purchase the usual shopping lists of
government, to deal with infrastructure and social needs, who are
diffuse and distributed enough to not really even need defense spending
per se.  Just low-budget offense and minimal coordination, if any.
  
## 77 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 11 Jan 02 10:12

    

Yeah, I've been wondering what the victory condition
looks like.

We might win this.  It sounds farfetched now,
but it was also supposed to be impossible to have
*conventional* military predominance.   But the US
most definitely achieved that: unrivalled, overwhelming,
conventional military power, on a global scale.
If you went and asked Grant or Pershing or Eisenhower
or MacArthur about our situation now, they wouldn't call
us victims;  they'd say we were in Oz.

If guerrilla assaults were supposed to be the be-all
and end-all, nobody would have invented armies.
Anybody can be a terrorist and yeah, it's cheap -- but
armies have profound advantages.  Simple advantages,
like logistics and a tax base. Unlike terrorists,
generals don't have to twitch in their sleep
and trade bedrooms every night.  Their files are
safe.  There's a chain of command and a career path.
There's professional esprit de corps.  And compared
to conspiracies, armies are huge.

Robin Hood gets a lot of admiring press, but y'know, there
are still law enforcement officials in Nottingham.
Robin's not around.

The US military kinda  gets it about guerrillas. They
can do guerrilla.  It's in the doctrinal manuals for
small unit engagements.  If you want to hide in the mountains
and ambush convoys in the dark, they'll hide in the mountains
and ambush *your* convoys in the dark, only they get night-vision
goggles and Kevlar body armor and satellite phones.

People always claim that the US gets bored fast,
but so does everybody else.  The US has outlasted
a lot of enemies.

Iran was a fanatical Islamic revolutionary state back in
the 1970s.  They couldn't keep the fervor up.
The kids born in Iran since then despise their own
regime and envy the diaspora kids.

You've got to be pretty goddamn keyed up to be willing to blow
yourself up at a moment's notice for decades on end.
Iran might well decide that theocracy is a shuck and
cave in, Soviet-style.  Then what is a mujihadeen to do?
At some point it gets simpler to put down the gun
and get a job -- assuming you haven't ruined your
society so thoroughly and utterly that there's
no such thing as a job possible.  And who knows,
maybe at that point the Diaspora floods back in
and just buys everything.

Maybe that is the victory condition: Very Nervous
New World Order.

If the USA, Europe, Russia and China all agree that
only rogue states shoot each other, and if they all get
behind the same surveillance screen while the
common enemy is an abstraction called
"Terror" (rather than actual nations), well, that's
a huge transformation.  We might be paranoid a lot of the
time and even lose the occasional city, but
that's a vast geo-strategic advance over the pre-Sept 11
status quo.  It would be World Peace.

Only nobody would call it that.  They'd call
it New War.  All the militarists would all think
they were just as tough-minded as they'd
ever been.  They'd strut and bristle just
like they always had, only there would never
be another Eastern Front.  Never another
Normandy, another Somme.

It would be the Empire of Permanent Emergency.
  
## 78 of 82: Gail Williams (gail) Sat 12 Jan 02 11:26

    

The Empire of Permanent Emergency.  

Wow. There's rich design opportunity.  Is that a logo, or a Coat of Arms?  
Plus a perma-crisis theme song, half-anthem, half-jingle...   something 
peppy but inspiring, so it can be sung at baseball games and 
other sporting events, musically similar to the Roto-Rooter "away goes 
trouble down the drain" tune.  All kinds of possibilities there.

And then there's the cover art for that massive, dusty unpublished 
treatise,
 
   Just Not Now: Civil Dissent in the Empire of Permanent Emergency.
  
## 79 of 82: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 12 Jan 02 12:59

    

  Yes, it's been fun, hasn't it?

  I have to leave this discussion now, as it is incumbent
upon me to fly to Washington.  I have to meet some people
there who do not want anyone to know that I have been talking to them.

   Luckily, a magazine that will also go unnamed is paying
me to do this.

   Someday we'll look back on all this and laugh.

   This is also the last day of the Viridian Design Contest
for a new logo for Enron corporation.  Soon I will
have to figure out who wins this contest.  If you have a firm idea
on the subject, send me email.  To bruces@well.com

The contest:
http://www.bomoco.com/Viridian/Enron/Enron.htm

Oh, and here's my new blog.
http://www.infinitematrix.net

And my WELL home page.
http://www.well.com/conf/mirrorshades/

And the Viridian Design site.
http://www.viridiandesign.org

That ought to keep you busy.
Gotta pack now. Don't be a stranger!
  
## 80 of 82: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 12 Jan 02 16:18

    
Thanks, Bruce! And thanks to all who jammed with us this go-round.  
  
## 81 of 82: Linda Castellani (castle) Sat 12 Jan 02 18:17

    

Thanks, Bruce!
  
## 82 of 82: exiled in viridianistan (reid) Sun 13 Jan 02 09:14

    

Fun!  Here's my own entry.  Hope I got it in under the wire!
http://www.well.com/user/reid/v2.html
  

