inkwell.vue.478 : Bruce Sterling, Cory Doctorow & Jon Lebkowsky: State Of The World 2015
## 0 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Sat 3 Jan 15 14:31

    

It's a new year and it's time for the 2015 edition of the State Of The World
discussion featuring Bruce Sterling and Jon Lebkowsky. This year, they are
joined by special guest, Cory Doctorow.


All WELL members are welcome to post, and non-members can participate as
well. Just tweet your comments or questions to @TheWELL or email them to
inkwell at well dot com.


Thanks for joining us.
  
## 1 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Sat 3 Jan 15 14:38

    

First, a little about our participants.

Bruce Sterling

A futurist, journalist, science-fiction author and design critic, Bruce
Sterling is best known for his novels and his seminal work on the
Mirrorshades anthology, which defined the cyberpunk genre.

His nonfiction works include The Hacker Crackdown: Law and Disorder on the
Electronic Frontier; Tomorrow Now: Envisioning the Next Fifty Years; and
Shaping Things. He is a contributing editor of Wired magazine, for which he
writes on a wide range of topics, including politics, globalization and
offshoring, technology and security, and the potential of NGOs. He also
writes a weblog. During 2005, Sterling was the "visionary in residence" at
Art Center College of Design in Pasadena. In 2008, he was the guest curator
for the Share Festival of Digital Art and Culture in Torino, Italy, as well
as the visionary in residence at the Sandberg Instituut in Amsterdam. In
2011, he returned to Art Center as visionary in residence to run a special
project on augmented reality. Bruce Sterling has appeared on Nightline, The
Late Show, Morningside, MTV, and TechTV and in Time, Newsweek, The Wall
Street Journal, The New York Times, Fortune, Nature, I.D., Metropolis,
Technology Review, Der Spiegel, La Stampa, La Repubblica, and many other
venues.


Cory Doctorow

Cory Doctorow (craphound.com) is a science fiction author, activist,
journalist and blogger -- the co-editor of Boing Boing (boingboing.net) and
the author of the YA graphic novel IN REAL LIFE, the nonfiction business
book INFORMATION DOESN'T WANT TO BE FREE< and young adult novels like
HOMELAND, PIRATE CINEMA and LITTLE BROTHER and novels for adults like
RAPTURE OF THE NERDS and MAKERS. He is the former European director of the
Electronic Frontier Foundation and co-founded the UK Open Rights Group. Born
in Toronto, Canada, he now lives in London.


Jon Lebkowsky

Jon Lebkowsky has been active in digital culture and media for over 25
years, and is currently focused on strategic digital consulting and
development as member and CEO of the Polycot Associates web development
cooperative. He is also known as an activist, sometimes journalist, and
blogger who writes about the future of the Internet, digital culture, media,
and society.

Heâ€™s been actively associated with various forward-looking projects and
organizations, including FringeWare (as CEO and as publisher and sometimes
editor of FringeWare Review), Whole Earth (as a writer, and as subdomain
editor for the Millennium Whole Earth Catalog), WorldChanging (as technology
manager and blogger), Viridian Design Movement (as website manager), Mondo
2000 (as a writer), Boing Boing (as writer and associate editor), Factsheet
Five (as book review editor), the WELL (as community host), the Austin
Chronicle (as writer), EFF-Austin (as President), Society of Participatory
Medicine (as cofounder and former board member), Extreme Democracy (as co-
editor), Wireless Future (as project manager), Digital Convergence
Initiative (as former board member), Plutopia Productions (as cofounder and
Chief Digital Officer), Polycot Consulting (as cofounder and CEO), Social
Web Strategies (as cofounder and social media consultant), and Reality
Augmented Blog (as cofounder, blogger, and manager).


<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bruce_Sterling>
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cory_Doctorow>
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jon_Lebkowsky>
  
## 2 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 4 Jan 15 01:45

    
*Ping ping, click click *tap* Is this thing on?  

*Who am I kidding?  The WELL is thirty years old!  It's ALWAYS on!
  
## 3 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sun 4 Jan 15 23:22

    
I'm here! My wife's in Las Vegas at CES, I'm getting ready to start a new
huge s33kr1t project with EFF, and the kid's about to head back to year two
at state school here in Hackney. The giant, unthinkably huge novel-for-
adults  I've been working on all through 2014 is nearly, nearly done (at
least the first draft), and I'm wrapping up a big freelance assignment
whose completion will create a lot of free space in my calendar for the
aforementioned EFF thing (as will the novel's completion).
  
## 4 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 15 03:55

    
*So then, Hello World yet again, and the WELL SOTW 2015 finds me
writing a brief historical fantasy about the Roman Empire.    Here
in 2015, I arrive pretty well-briefed about doings in 143 AD. 

*But we'll put the issue of historical fiction aside a moment -
because it's killing me -- and instead, let me try to establish a
few general WELL themes for 2015 before the discussion, as is
customary, exudes into every possible direction.

First, climate change, which has to be the central issue in any sane
discussion of the changing state of the world.  It's tedious to
repeat this every year, but last year was very hot.  Next year will
be hotter.  It's a shame that this has become a denialist
theological matter, but it's like telling a rich right-wing
alcoholic that his liver is decaying.   No doubt he'll simply claim
that's a culture-Marxist power grab by the over-educated medical
profession.  But the crisis is there, and it's getting worse, and
it's written all over the patient's face. Next.

The climate crisis is plenty bad, but it wasn't so ferociously
menacing as the Ebola epidemic.   I'm truly grateful that I'm not
composing this State of the World while people worldwide are swathed
in splashproofed yellow plastic.    

 That spectral likelihood didn't occur.  We were lucky, and also we
were good-enough.   A world plague is a grim thing to contemplate,
but the fact that we somehow lack a new one, frankly, rather cheers
me up.  It's a credit to the world's resilience.  That fact that we
can talk about anything BUT Ebola in 2015 is quite lovely.  We've
got high tea and strawberry cake when we could have been in the
quarantine tents.
  
## 5 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 15 03:55

    

      Then there's the existent, or the emergent, zeitgeist of  the
year 2015.  What can one say that is useful -- how does one
distinguish the state of the big wide world from your own personal
mental state?  There's always so much wishful thinking and
psychological projection there -- no matter who tries it.

      When I'm involved in writing fiction, as I am right now, I
always sense that aspect of public sense-making as personal
myth-making.   In even the biggest, most cosmopolitan novel,  every
fictional character in there is a minor fragment of the author. The 
world described in literature is  not "the world," it's prose, the
author's chosen words selected from the corpus of some language. 
It's a pretend-world that is one person's voice.

      In attempting to know the past,  you can read history, and you
think, hmmm, facts, dates, treaties, power struggles, or in contrast
you can read fiction written in the past, the literary classics, and
somehow you just intuit: well, it's made-up, but that's how it was
-- that's what it meant to be alive back then. 

        Combining fiction with history, historical fiction, is quite
a lot like trying to cram science into fiction.   They're sister
genres.  I used to be very interested in science, and rather
interested in fiction.  For some personal reason that may be of
general import, here in 2015, I'm somehow very interested in design
and rather interested in history.  

     So, in 2015, I seem to be writing some rather innovative period
material that's probably better described as "designer history" than
as "science fiction."  Nobody but a critic would see the difference
there, but I'm pretty sure it exists.

       The theme of science is the discovery of laws of nature,
while the theme of "designer history" is definitely "atemporality." 
Atemporality means literary hacks of the metaphysics of history --
how do we know what the passage of time means, how do we tell what
is new from what is old-fashioned?  What is wired, what is tired,
and what is fully retired, and who declares that, by what methods,
with what medium, with what rhetoric and how do they make those
labels stick?  Why does anybody ever believe a word of it?  

       Why, for instance, are people in Ukraine getting shot and
bombed in 2015 because Russian zealots somehow believe that ancient,
crusty, eldritch pre-Communist Russian Orthodoxy is modern?  Because
they do believe that, and they kill and die for it.  Novorussia in
the Ukraine is like patient zero for weaponized atemporality. Worse
yet, some of the biggest, best-armed zealots there are big sci-fi
fans.

       Can you take something dead as Nineveh, scrub the ID numbers
off it, steampunk it up some and release it into the wild as
something trendy and with-it?  Absolutely you can, and I have some
basic understanding of how it works now, but it still feels like a
hack, a sci-fi gimmick.  What I wish I understood was the deeper
craft of it.  Ars longa, vita brevis.
  
## 6 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 15 03:57

    

    As I get older, and boy am I ever in 2015, I can see  the
divisions of the past fading into the ambiguities of the present. 
I'm getting all authorly and deconstructive here, but, let's
consider, for instance, the grand distinction between the "global"
and the "local."  "Think globally, act locally," the "Whole Earth,"
and other shibboleths of my vanished youth here at Whole Earth
'Lectronic Link.  

        Every day, I see people in local streets, with handheld
devices, casually using global services.   You can use a local map
to venture from your doorstep to the florist's shop, and there are
extremely accurate, very up-to-date local maps of practically all
cities now.  But none of those local maps are "local" maps in the
sense, that they're owned, created or controlled by local citizens. 
No, they're all global maps.

       If you send your wife an SMS while she's upstairs, this very
local and intimate act gets routed through the cloud instantly.  
The cloud's existent in the bedroom, radiated through cell-towers. 

          I can easily make that sound weird, but it's 2015's
normality.    Thinking that the local will not be perceived,
transmitted and catalogued by the global, that global and locak
somehow still occupy distinctive categories, that's become a
crotchety and old-fashioned idea.  The year 2015 has globalized
domesticity.  It has the 'mobile glocal.'

         Then there's the big distinction of "personal" and the
"political," which feminists forty years ago were keen to abolish.  
We've got "glocal" as a portmanteau word for global yet also local,
but we don't have any good word to mean "personalitical."  

       But a modern outburst like #Gamergate, and god help us here
on the WELL if the troops of that conflict ever hear about it, is a
totally "personalitical"  phenomenon.   

         It's just one example, 'cause there's lots  network
politics in 2015 are radically "personalitical." It's all about
snarling baboon-troops of witch-hunt zealots uniting online to
harass the living daylights out of stray foot-soldiers from the
enemy camp.  That's personalized politics under the existent
network-society condition.  It's the 'human flesh search engine,' as
the Chinese used to call it, because the Chinese were great online
pioneers of weaponized scolding and dox-attacks.

         Actually, the enemy in network politics doesn't  have a
"camp" per se, because if it did, the enemy would be a properly
organized political party with some coherent platform that might win
elections and carry out intentional political change.   It seemed to
me for a while that political activists in parties might be able to
do this though networks, but in personalitical 2015, that  doesn't
seem to me to be possible.  

        Obama, who was supposedly the maestro of this activity, has
some of the worst political email I've seen.  It's relentless
fund-raising spam.  I'm amazed by its narrow, single-minded tedium. 
I've come to shudder at the sight of it in my mailbox.  Obama was so
personally unpredictable, and yet his political outreach is so
entirely predictable.   Why?  But -- what other actual, elected
statesman is any better at networking?   The only contemporary
political figure who consistently surprises me these days is the
Pope.
  
## 7 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 15 03:57

    
   Another big dichotomy that seems to me to be dissolving through
an epic effort is "Things" and "Internet."  This is a particular
crank hang-up of mine.  With any luck it will become a major project
for me this year.  More on this topic later, I reckon.

        The once-important distinction between "virtual" and
"actual" is severely archaic now.  It's just gone away, it's
academic at best, like the idle wonderment over whether your food's
been genetically modified.   

        How "actual" is your day in 2015?  Is there anybody anywhere
who's 100% actual?  Even the primeval Stone Age islanders of the
Sentinelese, who still persist in 2015 and shoot everybody who tries
to talk to them with cane bows, are under satellite surveillance. 
The Indian Navy rigorously protects them from any knowledge of the
Indian Navy.

         The division between print and screen used to be a big
formal deal.   Not any more.    And music, what a strange trip it's
had -- music went from analog vinyl to  digital CDs, to files, to
streams, and now people who actually want to physically possess
recorded music tend to be vinyl fans, once more, as if they'd gotten
over some ruinous acid trip.  That's because, after many digital
decades of alleged "advancement" and "improvement"  of music
production, music still sounds much better on big ungainly vinyl
plastic disks.  

        Or so I'm told by audiophiles, anyway; of course the music
on that analog vinyl was digitally produced, so that fish rots at
the head.

        "Television" as a separate entity is vanishing.  People used
to gather at home at specific prime times to watch local broadcasts
produced by remote big networks.  Then came videotapes, DVDs,
tube-streams, and in 2015, deadly network-neutrality warfare -- a
basic power-struggle in media, that's all about the vampire revenant
of popular television finally throttling the anarchic geek fountain
of the Internet.   

        People in 2015 really want the Internet to give them video. 
They never doubt that video is what it's all about.   All kinds of
video, mobile video, personal sex clips, funny animals, canned TV
series from someone else's country, blockbuster movies, whatever.  
If video means that cable providers and Netflix get dictatorial
power over the dry backbone of the Internet, so be it.
  
## 8 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 5 Jan 15 03:58

    
      As I mentioned last year, the stuff that modern people
generally still call "Internet" is basically Google, Amazon,
Facebook, Apple and Microsoft -- the "Stacks." Of course that's even
more so this year.  I'm not a big Stack fan myself, but even though
I'm a lonely-pamphleteer punk DIY Internet blogger by my
temperament, I spend most of my own screen time, not "on the
Internet," but on the smaller, alternative social networks, like
Twitter, Tumblr,  FlickR, and even Ello, the 2015 howling infant of
the bunch.    

     The appearance of Chinese Stacks in a Western contest quite
interests me.   In 2015, the Chinese Great Firewall will be trying
hard to buy-into startup capitalism.  How will that work out, this
year?  The Chinese have got cash galore, and it's hard to pretend
that the Politburo is any more intrusive than
Facebook/Google/Apple/Amazon/NSA.

    So: it is 2015, another year of advancement toward the
mid-century condition, an epoch of "old people in big cities afraid
of the sky."   It's coming; the mid-century's getting realer every
day; it means walls full of channel-switching screens clustered
around some a distinguished but lonely old Japanese otaku guy,
surrounded by manicured, arcane data while eating his canned soup in
a cold-water apartment.
     But speaking of the influence of William Gibson, he said
something very striking last year; that in the 20th century,
everyone spoke with reverence of the 21st, while here, deep into the
21st, the 22nd century never gets a look-in.  Of course he's right,
but this problem seems like honest work to me.  A child born in 2015
will be 85 in the Twenty-Second Century: it's within the reach of a
normal, average human life span.  

       So, the 22nd Century: I'm determined to make it our friend. 
I've resolved to talk more and more about it.  Let it be the
buzzword, let it become the watchword.    The 22nd Century, the
#22C: whatever the hell it is, it's getting closer every day.
  
## 9 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 5 Jan 15 06:24

    
Here's a list of trends I'm seeing as we roll into 2015:

Privatization of outer space: A number of companies are developing
spaceware
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_private_spaceflight_companies), and there’s one nonprofit that’s formed to colonize Mars by 2023 (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mars_One). Is the investment entirely speculative, or do we have clear business models driving a potential new space age?

Currency revolution: a number of alternative currencies have
appeared, most notably the cryptocurrency Bitcoin. There are also
technologies for digitally mediated barter. How will these be
integrated into existing economic systems? Are we really looking at
a (more? or less?) radical transformation of global economies?

AI/robotics: we’re beginning to see practical, usable applications
of robotics, and there’s much talk of evolving artificial
intelligence and possible singularity.  Alan Turing, via Benedict
Cumberbatch, is getting some attention. When asked in “The Imitation
Game” whether machines will ever think like humans, he scoffs -
that’s the wrong question. Machines may think, but not “like
humans.” Much of the singularity talk doesn’t get this point, but is
rooted in anthropomorphism, which makes about as much sense as a
golem emerging from a carefully-shaped clay effigy.  We like to
think there’s no intelligence that ain’t human, but that’s a shadow
of anthropocentric hubris. As we get into robotics and AI in a
bigger, industrial-strength, way, what will they teach us about
intelligence, human and other? 

Practical backlash against 1% and hyper-neoliberalism: the political
pendulum swings persistently, and it doesn’t make human sense to
roll backwards to some sort of feudal society. Also propaganda only
works so far before practical intelligence engenders some degree of
critical thinking. Okay, I’m being hopeful here, but I believe the
extreme factions in the civil cold war du jour will be overcome by
those who are more balanced, reasonable, and practical. 2015 could
be the turning point; waiting to hear the alarm ring.

Internet of things: There’s buzz around the IoT now, probably not
altogether practical, but driving investment that could fund
innovation. We ask the wrong questions about it, i.e. “why do I want
my toaster to talk to my refrigerator?” We should be considering
what “things” are most practical to network, and the pro and con
implications. Are there security implications? Are we depending too
much on networks, creating too great a vulnerability to network
failure?

Cyberwars, hacktivism, crypto activism:  Networked information
systems have inherent vulnerabilities, increasingly exploited by
various actors for various reasons. To the extent that we live our
lives online and invest in our online identities, we’re subject to
these vulnerabilities. This is increasingly obvious, and the
question for any one of us is, how vulnerable have I become, and how
to I mitigate risk? This is a question for individuals,
corporations, and governments. Mitigation can create obstructions
and limit the value of networks, so we have to think hard about the
risks we’re willing to take the measures we’re willing to adopt to
limit those risks. It’s also clear that governments (and
non-governmental movements) will engage in cyberwar - to what extent
will some of us suffer collateral damage from those engagements?  

Network fatigue: Expect to see more strategic cord-cutting: limiting
online activity generally and persistently, or perhaps periodically
(“no Facebook for 30 days”). Response to information overwhelm is
inevitable. 

“New democrats”: Liberal entities like the Democratic party in the
U.S. have proved ineffective as alternatives to well-organized
corporate conservatives. The health of societies depends on a
balance of the two approaches characterized simplistically as “left
vs right.” Correction of the current imbalance is inevitable, but
will likely involve entities that are nascent or don’t exist yet, vs
the established  entities of the left, which seem irrelevant and
obsolete, partly because they have sought to compete by identifying
with their opponents, rather than by emphasizing alternatives.  One
possible trend could emerge from a middling trend, i.e. a rejection
of polarization and an emphasis on a practical middle path between
“left wing” and “right wing.” 

Demilitarization of police:  Militarization of police after 9/11 may
have seemed like a good idea at the time, but none of us wanted to
create a police state, which is a potential effect. Going forward,
we’ll be reconsidering the roll of police departments in communities
and considering how to undo the downside of the militarization
efforts. We’ll be rethinking the role of police departments in
communities, and how to respond effectively to potential terrorist
acts within borders without confusing police objectives with
military objectives.

Crowdsourcing medical solutions: smart patients will have more of a
role in evolving therapies, and have more input into our
understanding of human systems and response to disease.
Participatory medicine will become more established. Medical
research will consider patient feedback to get a better sense of
complex contextual factors affecting health. More people will do
granular “quantified self” tracking, and there will be systems to
aggregate and analyze this information, impacting our understanding
of prevention as well as disease.
  
## 10 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Mon 5 Jan 15 09:43

    
There are three things that I think Need Work in the sense of, "If this
isn't resolved, everything else is harder."

1. Corruption.

Lessig started talking about this years ago and has a plan that's had
medium-good showing so far to do something about it.

The age of the governmental technocrat - the policy wonk who has an idea
whose purpose is to produce a kind of just, good, sustainable, ethically
grounded, common-good kind of outcome -- is over.

The ONLY policies with traction in 2015 are ones with business models:
unless the procurement process for your policy produces surplus capital that
can be siphoned off into the continuance of your policy, your policy is
dead.

That's why actual, useful Smart City stuff dies, while glitzy, press-
releasy, dividend-generating, shareholder-value-generating smart cities
thrive:



http://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/dec/17/truth-smart-city-destroy-democracy-urban-thinkers-buzzphrase

and their endgame is ugly:

http://boingboing.net/2015/01/05/privatized-offshore-cities-th.html

It's a fun -- and potentially useful -- exercise to think up policies that
do good while generating revenue for an industry that will lobby for their
continuance, but it is obviously true that lots of good policies have no
business model.

For example, running schools like businesses can produce outcomes that look
good on balance sheets -- rising attendance and standardized test scores --
but only by turning schools into things that don't do much educating.

So corruption.

2. Controlling people with comptuers

It really doesn't matter how important, just or righteous your cause is, you
can't and shouldn't try to realize it with DRM or anything like DRM. If
there's anything DRM taught us, it's that it doesn't actually stop any kind
of Bad Guy, because in order to do so, you would have to be able to
effectively hide secrets from the owner of a computer in the computer, and
that doesn't work for the same reason we don't put bank safes, no matter how
well designed, in the living rooms of bank-robbers.

People who advocate for DRM already know this. That's why they pass laws
making it a felony to help disable DRM. The problem is that there's no
technical definition between "reporting a bug in a system" and "helping
disable DRM in that system."

Your phone isn't mostly an entertainment device -- it's mostly an near-
omniscient surveillance device. Not the kind of surveillance we know about
-- the Snowden kind of surveillance -- but the kind of surveillance that no
one, anywere defends: the kind where creeps, crooks, voyeurs and script
kiddies can discover your bank details, photograph you and your kids in the
nude, listen in on all your phone calls (and in an Internet of Things world)
turn off your pacemaker or turn your house into a freezer by turning off the
heat in the middle of a Big Freeze.

The idea that we can make Turing Complete Minus One devices that run every
program except the ones we don't like is only gaining currency, because it
has a huge business model.

The FBI wants your phone to have a "lawful interception" back door --
meaning he wants it to run a program you can't turn off, and to stop you
from running programs that subvert it. There is no meaningful lawful
interception for devices you give to untrusted parties without a law
criminalizing its removal and the publication of information that would aid
in that removal.

3. I'll get to 3 later.
  
## 11 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Mon 5 Jan 15 23:36

    
3. Piketty and the automation of guard labor

Piketty's magesterial Capital in the 21st Century
(http://boingboing.net/2014/06/24/thomas-pikettys-capital-in-t.html) infused
the ideological wars of economics with much-needed evidence. A Boing Boing
reader compared it to Origin of Species in that regard, and there are other
important similarities to Darwin's work: first of all, C21 is LONG, because
Piketty's doing something dangerously heterodox, and he wants to anticipate
and head off his critics, so every possibly counterargument is raised and
addressed. This makes the book needlessly daunting -- the argument itself
could be carried off in a spritely, 150-page pamphlet, and someone should do
this.

The other similarity to Darwin is the conservatism at C21's core. Darwin
found incontrovertible evidence for evolution, but couldn't bring himself to
write God out of the equation, so he simply moved God up the stack,
declaring evolution to be God's tool for creating life.

Likewise, Piketty finds that capitalism produces higher returns for people
born rich than for people who generate the innovations that produce
prosperity, and cannot have a "meritocratic" outcome (which is the moral
justification for a society in which some are poor and others are rich --
the rich deserve it, because markets allocate wealth to the deserving).

But Piketty can't write capitalism out. He never even considers the
possibility of a non-capitalist system for organizing society. Instead, he
proposes a light gloss on capitalism, a nearly infinitesimal tax on the very
richest (which, predictably, the Gilded Age's overlords characterize as a
kind of Communist seizure).

Piketty's call to the technocrats, rulers, and electors is that wealth
disparity produces social instability. Over and over again, he uses the
wealth disparity on the eve of the French Revolution as a benchmark and
warning (I fear that Americans won't resonate with this example as much as
the French do).

This is self-evident. If people are desperately poor -- that is, if they are
literally dying due to lack of food, health care, education, shelter, and
other necessities -- and they are within shouting distance of people who
enjoy unimaginable wealth, then some force must keep the former from taking
the wealth of the latter.

That force may be moral -- a narrative about the fairness of markets and the
possibility that if you do good, the markets will carry you up the hill to
the gated community -- or it may be coercive (armies, police, surveillance).

In practice, it's both. And there's a kind of simple equation where the more
disparity grows, the more of the capital of the rich needs to be spent
maintaining coercive force and propaganda to keep the guillotines in
storage. At a certain point, you're spending more on stability than you're
retaining in wealth, and that's when it makes sense to deign to pay some
taxes, allow some labor and tenants' laws, etc.

In the last part of the 20th century, automation made suasion much cheaper:
the rise of mass media made it vastly cheaper for the rich and powerful to
convey their message to everyone else (Monroe Doctrine to Fox News).

In this century, automation has made coercion much cheaper, too. It's not
just the militarization of the police (itself a sterling example of a policy
with a business model: once there's a policy reason for the army to buy more
materiel than they can use, in order to gift it to the police, the excess
capital from those extra sales can be diverted in part to lobby to keep the
policy in place); it's the automation of surveillance and control through
our connected devices.

There are lots of comparisons to the surveillance apparatus revealed by
Snowden to the GDR's Stasi, but the reality is that the Stasi employed
armies of people, while the NSA and its contractor employ relative
squadrons. The cost of surveillance has dropped through the floor: indeed,
in many cases, there are NO marginal costs for surveillance. Once Prism is
in Google's data-center, the cost of surveilling a new Gmail user is zero.

This means that it is now practical to expand wealth disparity to heretofore
unheard-of levels. The curves of social-instability-versus-cost-of-coercion-
and-control have a new intersection.

This ties the other two factors together. Corruption enriches the few with
policies that ignore the common good in favor of self-dealing. The
subversion of devices and networks increases the sustainability of a
corrupt society marked by massive wealth disparity.
  
## 12 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 15 04:18

    
That analysis seems spot-on to me, except that I'm pretty clear the
hairy-palmed, inherently corrupt invisible hand described here has
little awareness of itself, i.e. is not consciously conspiring. The
rich get richer not because they're evil (though some are, and some
are aware of the mechanics and the implications, no doubt - cough,
cough, Koch). 

The increasingly wealthy are caught in a self-justifying delusion,
reinforced by a corruption of conscience, barely aware of the
workers in the machine rooms below Metropolis. The cycle of delusion
is hard to break. 700 pages from Piketty won't do it. A shock to the
system, like a great depression, might. We grow obese until that
coronary event that almost kills us.
  
## 13 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 15 04:24

    
Cory remarks:  "The ONLY policies with traction in 2015 are ones
with business models: unless the procurement process for your policy
produces surplus capital that can be siphoned off into the
continuance of your policy, your policy is dead."

*Yeah, the former division between the state and for-profit
enterprises has definitely turned into one of those highly-meltable
dichotomies.

*I bet we could multiply those examples by the hundred.  Examples
where the joy of the 1990s market solution has bred surreal and
monstrous situations.  For instance, a house is one thing, and a
market investment is supposedly another thing, and yet London's
poxed all over with empty neutron-bomb super-buildings that are
poker-chips for super-rich glocalists.
  
## 14 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 15 04:29

    
*After ten enjoyable years of frenetic global travel, I'm getting
kind of tired of not having a house.  Torino is a European city so
whacked by industrial decline that it's got tons of empty space. 
You'd think that the market logic of supply and demand would sort of
add A to B here, but it doesn't.

*It's not that the state gets in the way, though of course it's
weird and challenging to have foreigners living in your town.  I'm
thinking that the real problem is that even the state/ real property
market relationship has itself been marketized.  In a real estate
crisis, people make tons of money ensuring situations that mean that
people have no place to live in.  Italy is emptying fast, but it's
emptying even faster because young Italians can't get a roof in a
nation full of derelict properties.
  
## 15 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 6 Jan 15 04:36

    
I wonder if Piketty is gonna line up to see the tell-all biopic
movie that Valerie Trierweiler, former First Girlfriend of France,
is gonna make from her spiteful tell-all book.  If there is a case
zero for the utter inability of the Left to run a national
government, it's gotta be France.  I guess they can still surprise
me a little, but never, ever in a good way.

Their related inability to run a culture is illustrated by Piketty
turning down the Legion of Honor because the state shouldn't be
allowed to honor anybody.  What else does he think states are for? 
Has he never seen a statue or a postage stamp?  The guy's
credibility crashed with me there.  I can't trust the judgement of a
guy who has so little understanding of the nature of a public
sphere.
  
## 16 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Tue 6 Jan 15 06:25

    
The asset-ification of housing in the UK is incredible, and almost
impossible for foreigners to grasp. The US might have had its subprimes and
reverse-mortgages and LIAR loans, but in the UK there were at least four
state media TV shows about buying and flipping houses. There's this
consensus here that reasonable people buy into that says there's a thing
called "the housing ladder." Your first rung is a small flat, which
appreciates in value to the point where you can flip it for the down-payment
on a bigger house, etc. The fact that the *whole market* is correlated
(appreciating or depreciating as a piece) is conveniently ignored (after
all, Liverpool and London experienced different market conditions, so maybe
you could buy into the overheated rustbelt bubble, use that to get into
London etc). People are convinced that they must *own* a house as an asset
to a degree that beggars the imagination: for example, they buy fractional
interests in their homes (this is marketed as an affordable housing
arrangement), so that they co-own it with a huge, faceless property
management company.

The UK also has the bizarre institution of the "leasehold," which has not US
or Canadian analog. It's like owning a condo in a multi-unit building,
except there's no condo association, just a giant corporation that
technically owns your home (in our case, it's a theoretically nonprofit
affordable housing assocation that is using some of its surplus capital to
buy the freeholds of "market rent" places) and provides as much or as little
maintenance as they care to, or that you can sue them into (or out of), and
then bills you for it. What you own is a "lease" (not like a US lease) that
runs to 99 years, and that the "owner" must renew at rates set by statute.
The freeholders were originally aristos who owned huge swaths of England,
but by and large these have been parcelled out to speculators.

Meritorcracy is such a bizarre cult. Michael Young, who founded the Open
University (where I am affiliated), coined the term in a satirical essay in
1958. It is such obvious self-serving bullshit. "We live in a meritocracy. I
can tell, because I'm on top and I'm the best at the criteria we use to
determine who gets to be on top. The fact that me and other people who do
well on that criteria unilaterally declared it to be the dispositive factor
in determining merit is irrelevant. We're such lovely chaps, and so
meretricious, that we can certainly be relied upon to pick the right
criteria."

But a society needs *some* basis to hand-wave away inequality, and the
grosser the inequality, the more hand-waving you need. When London Mayor
Boris Johnson -- a colossal posh asshole -- engaged in a bit of jolly
eugenics:

"The harder you shake the pack the easier it will be for some cornflakes to
get to the top"

he was just saying what every committed dead-eyed American Psycho LARPer
thinks:

http://boingboing.net/2015/01/04/london-the-dead-eyed-banker-p.html

and none of them, apparently, have the self-awareness to imagine that every
crime-boss, dictator, and Grand Inquisitor thought the same thing (indeed,
these are the people whose money they generally invest in empty safe-
deposit-boxes-in-the-sky in central London).
  
## 17 of 198: Dodge (dodge1234) Tue 6 Jan 15 07:44

    
Bruces,
You could have substituted the U.S. for Italy in the statement about
citizens who cannot get a place to live altho surrounded by empty
houses. I read an article recently that stated there are more empty
and abandoned houses here in Houston than there are homeless and
that many of them are being razed because it is easier to sell a
vacant lot to developers than fix up or keep a house liveable until
it can be sold. What would be a solution, tho?
  
## 18 of 198: Ruth Bernstein (ruthb) Tue 6 Jan 15 07:45

    
meretricious=meritorious, surely. 
  
## 19 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 15 07:57

    
I'm a hard-working stiff with a charming little house in the
suburbs, but I'm drawn to resilient communities (which we discussed
here with John Robb,
http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/417/John-Robb-on-War-Peace-and-Resil-page01.html). Perhaps I could turn my suburban home into a self-sustaining oasis in the 'hood. 

My friend Randy Jewart has a "lifeboat" strategy
(http://www.resolutiongardens.com/farm/) where "gardening, solar
energy, rain water collection, green building and local economy are
part of our curriculum." 

Here's an excerpt from the page I just referenced:

Had a chance to meditate on LIFEBOAT EATING while trekking through
the panorama of extraction from Taos back to Austin.  (it’s a doozy
— complete with Monsanto billboards about their “trustworthy food
system”)

– the LIFEBOAT garden will be different than the way we are
gardening and farming now with the support of EMPIRE  (no commercial
nurseries, no commercial compost, no commercial minerals, no
industrial water)  how do we garden/farm without these commercial
inputs?

– what did folks eat BEFORE formal agriculture in this region? 
(native plants, game, insects)

– how will we adapt our gardening to climate changes?  (I know Jake
likes this one! and may be practicing some relevant approaches at
his project)

– how can we involve local culinary talent to help us develop easy
and tasty menus based on the things we know we can cultivate/forage
in our LIFEBOATS?

– how do we develop a MARKET strategy for our existing gardens/farms
that can TRANSITION into LIFEBOAT eating?

Taken on the whole, I think there is lots of great research and
practice to dive into in the short term that will yield some
exciting and productive activity for our families and community —
and potentially build a transition market to support LIFEBOAT
practice in the near-term and into collapse.
  
## 20 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Tue 6 Jan 15 08:17

    
Love that, notwithstanding my distrust of lifeboat metaphors:


http://www.locusmag.com/Perspectives/2014/03/cory-doctorow-cold-equations-and-moral-hazard/
  
## 21 of 198: Dodge (dodge1234) Tue 6 Jan 15 08:18

    
Permaculture farming, so saith my sister, is such a system. All
natural, no artificial means of fertilizing and pest control.
Balanced, self sustaining before major profit. Lack of debt. No more
farmers who don't have food on the table because they are trying to
keep afloat of their debt.
  
## 22 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Tue 6 Jan 15 09:58

    
What sorts of research need more emphasis and better funding?

(I can think of some candidates, but will save those for later.)
  
## 23 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Tue 6 Jan 15 12:10

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

Unggghghghg . . .

Suburban lifeboat gardens and independent farmers are swell things
if you have a big yard or are a farmer.

I don't think these things are on the same low level as a
survivalist squatting over a horde of nitrogen-packed people-kibble,
but c'mon, are you so willing to write off cities and trade? It
isn't like these things were created yesterday by vampire
capitalists.

Railways are an efficient way of connecting countryside and cities,
and there are no laws of physics preventing us from running
locomotives on green fuels.

Fertilizers are a manufactured petrochemical product *now,* but
whenever I read an article about researchers coming up with a way to
make liquid fuels from sunlight, grey water and farts, I wonder if a
similar techniques could be used to make fertilizer.

Which brings up something else I've been wondering about. Could
inconveniently situated (in time or space) surpluses in wind or
solar energy be used for "piecework?" Put a fertilizer or liquid
fuel factory in a shipping container and site it next to a wind
farm. If California or Houston needs the wind farm's juice, it gets
sent out on the grid. If not, the factory churns out a few carboys
of fertilizer.
  
## 24 of 198: descend into a fractal hell of meta-truthiness (jmcarlin) Tue 6 Jan 15 13:37

    

I've been caught by the difference between what constitutes "news"
from the fear/anger/confusion generating media driving eyeballs to
ads versus what is really going on in the world.

Today's wars are bad but compared to the 20th Century mere piffles.
Abject poverty is decreasing. Diseases like cancer are coming more
under control. There are stories about new developments to overcome
antibiotic resistance. The list goes on.

Yes there are serious issues that need to be addressed but I'm wondering
what you find especially significant in more positive developments.
  
## 25 of 198: Suzanne Stefanac (zorca) Tue 6 Jan 15 14:30

    
over on alternet, joseph stiglitz argues against piketty saying that
the rise in inequality is not caused by the accumulation of wealth
(savings/capital goods), but rather an increase in the value of
urban land. 

http://www.alternet.org/economy/joseph-stiglitz-why-rich-are-getting-richer-and-why-it-could-get-much-worse

he goes on to say that piketty's 'tax the rich' may be
over-simplistic, "If most of the savings is being done by
capitalists, and you tax the return on capital, then they will have
less to invest. That would mean, over the long run, that the rate of
interest would go up. That would therefore undo some of the intent
to lower the income of capitalists."

should i burn all these 'tax the rich' t-shirts?
  
## 26 of 198: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Tue 6 Jan 15 22:43

    

quick question - what's our URL at this discussion, for sharing with the
world?
  
## 27 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 15 02:41

    
*Yum, Jon, 22nd Century pre-agricultural insect scrounging in a
post-market anarchist freehold!  You heard that first here on the
WELL SoTW, ladies and gentlemen!
  
## 28 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 15 02:43

    
*Yum, Jon, 22nd Century pre-agricultural insect scrounging in a
post-market anarchist freehold!  You heard that here first on the
WELL SoTW, ladies and gentlemen!

Lest it sound like I'm merely cursing the darkness of the bank-ster
meritocrats rather than lighting a candle, check this out.  Me and
the mrs. are gonna open, and fully outfit an Internet-of-Things
House of the Future apartment inside the Torino Fab Lab.  Yes,  in
2015.  With all mod Arduino cons!  We've got designers, Makers, and
the Fab Lab has almost kind of got the funding!

You want to see what 100-percent actual Turinese industrial decline
looks like?  Check out the Fab Lab upstairs bat-cave here, a chunk
of dead factory that hasn't been renovated or even properly aired
out since the 1970s.  This year, as part of a two-year project,
we're gonna physically drag this derelict space toward the #22C by
main force of arms.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/sets/72157647536440143/

*Demo or die, as they like the say at the MIT Media Lab.   
Actually, what its current director Joi Ito likes to say is "Deploy
or Die."  With a project like "Casa Jasmina,"  that is the victory
condition.

http://radar.oreilly.com/2014/04/joi-ito-deploy-or-die.html
  
## 29 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Wed 7 Jan 15 03:13

    
I can't wait to visit. We'll bring the kid.
  
## 30 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 15 03:51

    
Yeah, in the unlikely event of my retirement, I'd hope to graze the
pastures around the Arduino House.

This reminds me of the DIY Home of the Future, ca. 2007:
http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/007375.html

I'm happy to reproduce here:

Creating a futurist showcase is a great way to stumble onto new
concepts; one that we're playing with is ambient intelligence,
defined in Wikipedia as "electronic environments that are sensitive
and responsive to the presence of people." It's kind of like
ubiquitous computing, or ubicomp -- the integration of information
processing into everyday things... cars, toasters, wall,
refrigerators, dust -- which I discussed with Adam Greenfield,
author of Everyware: The Dawing Age of Ubiquitous Computingin our
Worldchanging interview last year. Ubicomp and ambient intelligence
are both about processors embedded all around us; the difference is
that ambient intelligence describes an environment, while ubicomp is
about an "internet of things."

Imagine sensitive nanobots among particles of dust, working in
aggregate to facilitate smart-room responses. At our Maker Faire
installation, we want to suggest this sort of future. The DIY aspect
is that you can construct a reality of your own making, making your
home less a set of walls created by others than a malleable
infrastructure that can be shaped according to your tastes and
desires: a wall that could be a composite of images from anywhere,
about anything; a fine-tuned environmental program that adjusts heat
and humidity according to your moods; a "smell wall" that can emit
odors, even pheromones; a biofeedback room where you can reach
technology-mediated mental and physical states; a Second Life sort
of visual interface that is pervasive throughout.

Second Life is part of the picture because it points to the
potential for a graphical operating system and interface for the
virtual home of tomorrow, in which immerseive environments are coded
for large high def display throughout the living space, creating a
bridge between our everyday lives and something like television, but
one that you experience irather than merely watch. This sort of home
life is already percolating: there are gamers in my family who own
massive high-def television sets that fill the room with the game
experience. We're imagining that and more. For instance, at Maker
Faire, we're going to show "Healing Rhythms" by Wild Divine, a
"whole body wellness system" that combines meditative exercises with
biofeedback hardware and sensors. A future high def ambient system
like this could be used to create a meditation wall custom-synced to
biorhythms, possibly including light and sound technology to help
tune specific brainwaves. (This is for wellness, arguably not so
much for spiritual voyages; I'm not convinced computer-generated
environments would be effective in breaking the cycle of birth and
death.)

Of course there's a down side: a world where some significant part
of your everyday reality is computer-mediated and media-infused
contains infinite real estate for advertising. That aspect of
commercial television will be leaking into everything -- a
phenomenon visualized persuasively in the movie Minority Report.
You'll want to have a popup blocker embedded in your brain.

How likely is it that all this will come about? Ambient intelligence
and the computer-mediated DIY environment of the future are
suggested by current trends, but more extreme visions, like Minority
Report's ad-saturated extended mall environment, might drive people
away, and therefore fail. I want to believe there's a limit to our
tolerance for marketing messages; consider the Eisenbergs'
conjectures, supported by research, that heavy-handed ad-saturated
marketing just doesn't work. That said, it's a near-truism that
while we seldom get the future we predict, we always get the future
we choose.

At Maker Faire, my team will not be giving much weight to the down
side in our vision of the home of the future; we prefer to focus on
the use of digital technology to change, hopefully enhance, what it
means to be human. Some of us who've been cyborging like crazy for
almost two decades now are already creeping up on the digital future
and the promise of a technological singularity, whatever that might
be. I've been skeptical of some visions of singularity. But thinking
about future environments, watching change accelerate, it's hard to
avoid a supposition that we're on the verge...but just what we're on
the verge of is quite open to speculation.
  
## 31 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 15 03:52

    
*Looks like some jihadis in Paris just blew away a French satirical
magazine, "Charlie Hebdo," using rocket-propelled grenades.  Twitter
suggests the multiple attackers are still at large and driving
around Paris armed to the teeth.
  
## 32 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 15 03:56

    
Part 2 of the DIY Home of the Future:
http://www.worldchanging.com/archives/007468.html

You might not think this would be the ideal context for a futurist
showcase, but we saw the creative chaos of the first couple of Maker
Faires in California, and knew the guys at Make would be receptive.
Sure enough, Dale Dougherty, publisher of Make Magazine and the lead
on Maker Faire, totally got our high-level concept: we were inspired
by the famous "Futurama" exhibit and ride at the 1939-40 World's
Fair in New York, which took visitors on a tour of the world 20
years into the future. While this Futurama featured visions of
suburbia and superhighways, our effort for Maker Faire would be the
"DIY Home of the Future," a concept that worked well as a
representation of the convergent future, and as a manifestation of
several converging paths in Derek's recent thinking. We saw our
effort, while not quite so grand as the World's Fair exhibit, as the
first of many -- allowing time to pave the way to our vision of
Tomorrowland.

In his research for various companies and projects, Derek has
gathered material about different aspects of the home of the future,
from which he has derived three general attributes:

Immersive. 
The home of the future is a platform for both ambient and focused
converged media. According to Derek, the key elements are "seamless
, multi-sensory engagement and the opportunity to shar,,
collaborate, connect, explore and grow. Immersive environments, use
augmented reality to take such experiences to new highs, by enabling
the user to extend the "Self" and his /her personal potential. It
allows us to achieve deeper understanding of our sub- and
unconscious through emotional and cognitive interfaces to reach what
we call the "Sense Event" - a harmony of our sensory energy with
total engagement."

Responsive. 
One possible future is personified in SARAH (Self Actuated
Residential Automated Habitat), the smart house of the future on the
SciFi Channel's "Eureka." SARAH is a responsive home – in fact,
she's quirky, and she talks back... but she's also aligned with
Derek's vision of the responsive home as "one in which the living
space is sensitive to one's needs, personalized to the user's
requirements, anticipatory of the behavior and responsive to the
person's presence, in order to improve one's quality of life,
overall." It "leverages ambient intelligence and socially- and
context-aware smart sensors in order to optimize and augment the
living conditions and environment."

Reconfigurable. 
The reconfigurable home "consists of walls and devices that respond
to sound, light, touch, footsteps, smell, phone calls, mp3 players
and even distant remotely connected spaces. Both the physical and
the ambient elements can be changed by means of sensor and actuator
systems, spatial robots, LEDs, sound and other integrated
networks.... New architectural experiments are investigating how one
might construct an interactive environment that builds up an
internal representation of its occupants through a network of
autonomous but communicative sensors, so that the home may better
represent the user's emotional, physical and cognitive state."

For Maker Faire, we focused on immersive media. Front and center we
placed Brian Park's Flogiston Chair, which was designed "based on
the idea that you didn't need a body in cyberspace, just a presence,
so the chair was a place to leave your body" (it was featured in the
film "Lawnmower Man"), with a curved rear projection screen for
gaming. We projected a high definition, high-intensity Xbox game as
part of the demonstration. In addition, David Demaris, the wizard
who did much of the actual production work, brought in a massive
screen and combined ambient music with visuals that could be
manipulated by moving one's hands over sensors -- a kind of visual
theremin.

To give a sense of the potential for interaction between the digital
environment and mind/body, we ran a demonstration of Wild Divine's
"Healing Rhythms" biofeedback software, a system that includes
several guided meditations with audiovisual environments that you
manipulate by controlling your own physiology, with heart rate and
skin response sensors attached to your fingers.

The DIY aspect of this rests partly in the control you, as the
occupant, have over configuring digital systems as well as physical
architecture, and partly in the sense that you can (re)invent
yourself as you reconfigure your environment.

Our DIY House of the Future isn't too far out from current reality.
There's already a proliferation of large screen, high-definition
displays in the consumer electronics market -- and they're getting
cheaper -- so whole-wall displays aren't hard to imagine. Embedded
sensor networks are the wave of the very near future. The immersive
game environment Derek and I suggested would be relatively easy to
build and market, and it drew enthusiastic crowds at Maker Faire (it
helped to have game play in the mix).
  
## 33 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 15 04:26

    
The terrorists that attacked the Charlie Hebdo offices were serious
- quote from police: "It was a commando with Kalasnikov and pump
action ...they went in there to kill."

Wikipedia's on it:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2015_shooting_at_Charlie_Hebdo

Live udpates via The Guardian:
http://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/jan/07/shooting-paris-satirical-magazine-charlie-hebdo

Another battle in the culture wars... fundamentalists (not just
Muslims) justify violence in defense of the bridge to paradise.
Telling those guys that they're delusional doesn't have much of an
effect; making light of their delusion is outright dangerous.
  
## 34 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Wed 7 Jan 15 08:19

    
So here's the question: will the right-wingers who hated these cartoonists
yesterday suddenly declare themselves to be true-blue defenders of left-wing
parody magazines, in the mold of all those Sodom-on-the-Hudson NYC haters
who were overnight I <3 NY partisans on 9/12, declaring the imperative to
Kill Someone to avenge the city they'd have cheerfully wiped off the map of
America the day before?
  
## 35 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 15 09:09

    
*Well, it's a hot issue right now because it's a fresh atrocity, but
no, of course it won't have any effect on rightists being right or
leftists being left.  People will be shocked but they just read a
confirmation of their own world-view in stuff like that.

*Lots of journalists get killed.  It's a little unusual to get mowed
down at work by a death squad on the soil of a NATO power, but lots
of journalists get killed.  Year after year,

https://www.cpj.org/killed/2014/

In point of fact we were having a similar discussion during the SOTW
last year.  Are journalists still necessary, was the issue, and the
response was that if people were still killing them then they must
be serving some function.
  
## 36 of 198: Gail Williams (gail) Wed 7 Jan 15 09:24

    
Yes, but satirists...

maybe it's due to my own distant past life of performing satire
during the Reaganiferous Period, or maybe it's the extra rights
carved out in the arena of intellectual property in US law, but
dammit, is nothing sacred? Murdering the jesters. Damn.
  
  
## 37 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 7 Jan 15 09:44

    

bruce, in the spirit of yr much late-lamented viridian list, a big question
about yr lab demo italian hi-style house:

what are the cradle-to-cradle issues with all the electronics + geegaws? are
they going to made from ground local olive pits?
i.e what are the toxics/carbon footprint involved in manufacture of these?
last i heard, microprocessors are like sausage are like laws: you dont wanna
know how they are made.

presumably the hi-styyle house be powered in some earth-muffiny microgrid
way?

(ducking)
  
## 38 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 15 09:57

    
Holy war on cartoonists is very 21st century, I think. But I'm
having a post-structural resistance to any kind of useful analysis
of the proliferation of acts like this. 

Dan Gillmor counseled against drawing conclusions about the
instigators, actors, and potentially movements associated with this
latest bit of mayhem - no rush to judgement. 

What will they be writing about this in 2020?
  
## 39 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Wed 7 Jan 15 10:05

    

a short URL for the world-viewable version of this topic, by the way, is:

<http://tinyurl.com/sotw2015>
  
## 40 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Wed 7 Jan 15 13:07

    


and a reminder that non-members can participate in this discussion by
tweeting to @theWELL or emailing inkwell at well dot com.
  
## 41 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 7 Jan 15 14:44

    
*A semi-employed French fish salesman, his brother, and a high
school student.  Our world won't soon run out of terrorists of that
caliber.
  
## 42 of 198: those Andropovian bongs (rik) Wed 7 Jan 15 14:50

    
They were more effective than their day jobs would suggest.
  
## 43 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Wed 7 Jan 15 15:12

    

Hey, Bruce.

From Joe Crawford on Twitter:

(@artlung)

@TheWELL For Bruce Sterling - would you care to comment on your post-9/11
musings from 2004 SOTW?

<http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/204/The-2004-Bruce-Sterling-State-of-page02.html#post32>
  
## 44 of 198: Evelyn Pine (evy) Wed 7 Jan 15 15:17

    
Yeah, not all-- but often journalists who are murdered are in war zones.

Point of Information:  was it a man or a woman who named that "self-
actualized habitat" a woman's name? That's like something out of the
previous century.

In fact, I would argue the way to make the greatest change in the state of
the world is to get more money and power in the hands of women.
Technological fixes aren't going to have the same impact, that's for
certain, though they could certainly be part of the toolkit.
  
## 45 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 7 Jan 15 17:00

    
> was it a man or a woman

"Casa Jasmina" is named for one of its prime movers, Jasmina
Tesanovic. She's a 21st century activist journalist diy maven. She's
also married to Mr. Sterling.

When you say shifting more money and power to women would make a
change, I assume you mean a change for the better? They say that
power corrupts - are women incorruptible? Our would we be shifting
the corruption, as well?

Some believe that a more democratic distribution of power would be a
fix, and I tend to lean that way. We'd all do well to support the
P2P Foundation (http://p2pfoundation.net/) and follow Michel
Bauwens. Consider stream 3 in the "aims" section of the P2P
Foundation home page:

"... recreating political voice and power, through bottom up
Assemblies of the Commons and Chamber of the Commons that put
forward social charters, AND through 'top-down' progressive
coalitions (through existing politics and parties) coalitions around
the commons , i.e. 'the politics and policies of the commons', that
continue our efforts to implement Commons Transition Plans."
  
## 46 of 198: (fom) Wed 7 Jan 15 19:49

    
I may be wrong but I think evy was referring to "SARAH."
  
## 47 of 198: Evelyn Pine (evy) Wed 7 Jan 15 21:19

    
Yep.  I meant, SARAH.

And, yep, I meant "change" -- I know a lot of women and I don't think
they're any worse than men, IMHO.
  
## 48 of 198: (fom) Wed 7 Jan 15 21:55

    
 >When you say shifting more money and power to women would make a
  change, I assume you mean a change for the better? They say that
  power corrupts - are women incorruptible? Our would we be shifting
  the corruption, as well?


Just had to see that again.

I mean, seriously!? You seem to be saying: Don't rock the boat by letting 
women have any power because maybe women might not be perfect! Keep them 
in their place or else things might get worse!

God forbid women should even be mentioned in this topic, I get that part, 
but still.
  
## 49 of 198: (fom) Wed 7 Jan 15 22:55

    
And also, will no one answer Paulina's question (#37)? Or are we not 
supposed to ask questions here? 
  
## 50 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 01:12

    

Well, @loris Paulina, figuring out what possible toxins might flow
into an "open source house of the future" is quite  an interesting
tangle of issues.   I'm pretty sure there's a book in it.  I wrote a
design-critic pamphlet last year, called "The Epic Struggle of the
Internet of Things," but that was just an ideological warm-up.

First, "Casa Jasmina" is a hack lab.  We've got sponsors because
they want to see what we can do with it.  Since it's an Arduino
co-project with  Toolbox (the local Turinese design co-working
space), our area of central interest is basically Italian home
automation.   Yesterday's home automation systems are turning into 
tomorrow's Internet-of-Things Home, with its wireless broadband,
data protocols, battery-powered gizmos on the walls and ceilings,
screen prompts, chirpy thermostats, creepy vidcams over the toilet,
all that.  We ourselves don't know what we'll do.  If we knew the
outcome, it wouldn't be research.

Second, it will be a Turinese guest apartment, because Arduino, the
Fab Lab, and Toolbox Co-Working rather need one so as to briefly
house passing celebrities, allies, clients, whomever.   We must try
hard not to electrocute the guests, choke them with off-gassed
toxins, maim them with over-elaborate 3DPrinted plastic
folding-chairs, set fire to them while they sleep, and so many other
lively possibilities…  There are some basic hotelier
safety-and-comfort issues here.

Third, it's a showplace.  It's a public demonstration project.  The
Maker scene  is quite lively in Italy because of Italy's long
traditions of small-scale craft production.  Arduino is open-source
electronic craft production outfit which is global in some ways, but
also very "Make in Italy."  We're trying to figure out what regional
Italian digital craft manufacturing looks like in the near future. 
It makes sense to do it locally because  Torino is Italy's most
industrial city.  There's heaps of "Make in Italy,"  and like any
creative effusion it varies in quality.  Somebody has to curate it. 
Somebody has to figure out what's "best," and what "best" means.  

So, that's me.  That is my basic role in the effort.  I'm the
Curator.  I don't design stuff, I don't build stuff, I'm not a
Maker, least of all do I make furniture…  But I am pretty much
always the oldest guy in the room nowadays, when it comes to
innovative efforts of this kind.  I've always been a critic.   The
house of the future's arriving, day by day.  So what's good about it
and what's not so good about it?
  
## 51 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 01:13

    

I'll give you a brief sample of my curatorial thinking here.  As the
in-house design critic for the house of the future, I like to think
historically.  As you've probably gathered if you've been reading
the WELL SoTW for years on end, historically is how I think about
everything.

So let's imagine I'm Henry Dreyfuss, protean industrial designer of
the 20th century.  I've literally designed the proverbial "flying
car" -- that scheme failed because it always does, but I'm second to
none in advanced industrial design chops.  

I'm a butler between heavy mass industry and the American consumer. 
I'm the lubricant, I'm the varnish-on-barbarism.  I'm an industrial
designer and so (1) I make stuff look good.  And (2) I choose proper
materials and processes so it doesn't fall apart like junk.  And (3)
it needs the right price-point, the cost is a big issue.  For my
criterion (4) it needs to be maintainable during its product
life-span, and for (5) it should efficiently serve some actual
useful need that real people actually have.  And in conclusion (6)
it would be nice if my designer industrial product was safe to use,
safe to be around, and didn't poison or kill anybody.

So, now it's 2015.  I put on my snap-brim Henry Dreyfuss hat of the
1940s and I enter the Internet-of-Things home, with my paper
checklist on my clipboard.

(1) Do  Maker chairs assembled from laser-cut plywood modules and
perforated packing straps actually "look good"?  Sort of.

(2) Do 3DPrinted doorknobs fused together by rapid-prototype
machines hold up under realistic daily use conditions for real
doorknobs?  Nope.

(3)  Is this cheap?  Yeah, open source is notoriously "cheap," even
"free" as in free kitten, free speech, free beer.  But it's cheap
because it disguises labor costs by fragmenting them into small
off-the-books actions united by the network. Besides, we're
Italians!   We sell fancy fumiture to Yankees, Arabs, and Russians! 
When they want "cheap," they go to Ikea.

(4)  Does any electronic thing within a smart home have the solid
lifespan of, say, a wooden joist up in the roof?  Isn't this really
just the logic of the Apple iPhone or Google Android -- faster,
better, more personal, throw the old one away -- seeping into other
domestic objects, and infecting them with their vices?

(5)  Let's be practical.  What do I really gain by having my
refrigerator "talk" to something?  Any Arduino thing can ping out a
data-burst and "talk" to any gizmo on the planet for peanuts.  Where
is the humane need for that?

(6)  Hackers!  ZOMG, aieee!! Hackers and spies!  Hackers and spies,
pedophiles, terrorists, the mafia, drug dealers, ad-men!  They're
all over the smart home, they're in the flower-box now, it's like a
TWILIGHT ZONE episode!

*So, that's one possible way to critically frame it.  The judge -- a
guy your grandfather's age -- solves the problem by appealing to the
cultural authority of a guy his own grandfather's age.   People like
that, it's comforting in some ways, it has continuity, stability,
tradition. WWHDD, What Would Henry Dreyfuss Do?  

But that's not the only approach.
  
## 52 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 01:24

    
> You seem to be saying: Don't rock the boat by letting 
> women have any power because maybe women might not be perfect!

I'm not clear how you could read that into my post?

I didn't suggest that women shouldn't "have any power," though I
suspect we can all agree that "women might not be perfect." As <evy>
says, women are not any worse than men. Women should have as much
money and power (and rights) as men. However I questioned whether
giving women *more* power and money would inherently make the world
a better place. And it really was a question, not an assertion.

(Bruce slipped in with a couple of posts, including a response to
Paulina.)
  
## 53 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 01:41

    
The future of governance is interestingly difficult. We've been
exploring it here in Austin via a loosely coordinated future salon,
guided through a couple of sessions by Jake Dunagan of the Institute
for the Future's Governance Futures Lab, using a speculative design
methodology they've evolved. 

Here's a reference: http://www.iftf.org/govfutures/

"The mission of the Governance Futures Lab is to reimagine and
experiment with the basic architectures and processes of governance.
We believe it is necessary to experiment with new systems and new
rules to govern life on our planet. We have powerful tools to
connect, organize and coordinate human behavior."

We used the toolkit found here:
http://reconcon.govfutures.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/IFTF_GovFuturesLab_AnInventorsToolkit.pdf

It's a set of cards to guide a process of investigation and
deliberation with four general steps: investigate, re-think, design,
and prototype.

We had breakout groups at our second session. Here's the report I
filed on the work of the group I was part of:

We started out talking about TRUST

We came up with these values:
* Respect for the future; not foreclosing options for the future.
* Common good
* Dynamic balance between liberty and community
* Responsibility to the future and the community (what
sustainability is about.)
Effective governance that is sensitive to participatory process.

We had no luck coming up with metrics for success as the clock was
ticking, so we moved on to territory. We fell into a conversation
about water management and governance as urgent issues related to
geography, and Jake guided us by pointing out that in Hawaii, there
a group chose to organize politically by watershed.

Build a foundational framework: we talked about the area over the
Edwards Aquifer as a specific geographical area. There are complex
interests and governance mechanisms for the aquifer. "There's water
schemes all over the place." We realized that water politics would
drive general politics.

What's the best way to regulate and distribute water. By need? Who
defines need.

We talked about governance by instability vs governance with an
assumption of stability and permanence (nodding to Steve Smaha,
who'd brought up the relevance of impermanence to governance.)

Population is a related issues: more people would draw more water
from the water table. Should we cap the population? How would we do
that? Would we nuke homeless people? Who and how many would you
accept in a given area, if you were to restrict population? (Or do
we look first to other restrictions, i.e. more of what we have now,
restrictions on watering grass etc.)

We want to continue to maintain Barton Springs. Julia: "we have to
maintain green space to maintain springs."

Design: We need a design that will not subsidize the behaviors we
don't want. Urban density is more efficient.

As we discussed creating our preamble, we got away from the
discussion of water specifically, though that discussion had
informed our thinking.

Preamble: "Because democracy is impractical and the two-party
system, with primaries, has failed, we ant to build a new system
that will honor expertise as well as participation. Our proposal is
to create a parliamentary body for governance, where participation
in parliament depends on a threshold of supporters. A desire to
serve with the parliamentary body is grounds for disqualification.
You must be nominated against your will."
  
## 54 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 01:53

    
Our high-level takeaway was a sense how difficult effective
governance can be. We were focused on the local watershed, and we
realized that there were a substantial number of stakeholders and
governing entities with competing interests and priorities. A real
can of worms, how to sort it out? Who has what authority? A real
value of the exercise was that we started to get our heads around
the daunting complexity of governance, even in this local and
limited sphere.
  
## 55 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 04:39

    
*I was asked to comment on:

http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/204/The-2004-Bruce-Sterling-State-of-page02.html#post32

*It's heck to live long enough that you have to reminisce about old
predictions, but we're currently somewhere between scenario C,"Cold
War II" and E, "Greater Afghanistan."
  
## 56 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 05:50

    
Nice analysis here of the "Apple of China," Xiaomi, attempting to
become a Chinese Stack.  Their eager fans helping them out from the
sheer joy of being crowd-centric fanboys, that's quite interesting.

http://stratechery.com/2015/xiaomis-ambition/
  
## 57 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 06:01

    
*For those who are fans of time catching up with science fiction
writers, this is me, quite some time ago, testifying in the US
Congress about the state of telecommunications in 2015.

http://archive.wired.com/wired/archive/1.04/1.4_lifeonthenet_pr.html

*It sounded pretty freaky at the time, about as weird as Congressmen
paid to listen to me could handle, but as a forecast, it's pretty
tame by the existent reality of 2015.
  
## 58 of 198: Evelyn Pine (evy) Thu 8 Jan 15 08:09

    
Re: 52 -- thanks for the response.

Would women having more money and more power make things better? Well, more
ability to create your own live, having a little more money in your pocket,
having more autonomy and agency, and having the power to socially and
politically work in your own interest -- um, call me crazy, but I think most
people would say, yep that would make my life better -- and if there were a
lot of those people who don't have that now, and they got that at least for
those people, they would be happier, freer, likely more creative, so I would
say -- it would make the world a better place -- and if only for those oh,
49-51% of the people -- not bad.
  
## 59 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Thu 8 Jan 15 09:01

    
From http://www.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/478/Bruce-Sterling-Cory-Doctorow-Jon-page03.html#post53
> Our proposal is to create a parliamentary body for governance, 
> where participation in parliament depends on a threshold of 
> supporters.

This reminds me of something that's been sitting in my WEB directory,
gathering dust, for a very long time:

http://www.well.com/user/satyr/755/proxy.html

"The basic idea of representation by proxy is that the individual 
would be free to choose from a wide range of candidates 
and to select one whose views closely correspond to their own, 
and that the voting power of representatives would be proportional 
to the number of proxies held by each."
  
## 60 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Thu 8 Jan 15 11:39

    
This just in, from the authors of The Cluetrain Manifesto:

New Clues
http://cluetrain.com/newclues/
  
## 61 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 12:29

    
*The Pope met Angelina Jolie.  He's a surprising guy, this Pope.

http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/01/08/us-people-pope-jolie-idUSKBN0KH1CM20150108

*I wonder why Brad Pitt didn't bother to show up for the audience. 
I mean, they are married, that's almost sort of Catholic if you
squint hard.
  
## 62 of 198: Jack Radey via (lendie) Thu 8 Jan 15 12:37

    

Someone had to watch the kids.
  
## 63 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 12:41

    
*For genuine thirty-year WELLbeing old-timers, here's your chance to
read a communal compilation that looks like CoEvolution Quarterly
without the Buddhism and LSD.

http://www.shareable.net/sharing-cities-toolkit
  
## 64 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 12:45

    
<evy>, I think I misread the intention of your earlier comment. I
think we agree! I hope to write something longer about power and how
it's distributed before we're done.

<satyr>: Doc Searls and David Weinberger are wise; would that more
people could hear their wisdom. We should spread that URL far and
wide.

I love this: "If we had a solution, we wouldn't be bothering you
with all these damn clues." Indeed.

I want to go on record admitting my own ignorance.  I don't know how
to fix the economy or make a better distribution of power. I don't
know how to make hatred and polarization evaporate. I don't know how
to end wars or stop terrorists. I don't know what to do about
climate change. I don't know how to make democracy work (in fact,
I'm dubious that it can work, depending how you define it). 

I do know that much of what I read online every day is farmed
content, and weeds proliferate. 

I do get, as Doc and David say, that "the Internet is nothing and
has no purpose." That makes me think of Buddhist teaching about
emptiness, and my ongoing struggle to sustain the insight that there
is no-thing between my ears. 

Quoting the last lines of "newclues":

If we have focused on the role of the People of the Net  — you and
us — in the Internet's fall from grace, that's because we still have
the faith we came in with.

We, the People of the Net, cannot fathom how much we can do together
because we are far from finished inventing how to be together.

The Internet has liberated an ancient force — the gravity drawing us
together.

* The gravity of connection is love.
* Long live the open Internet.
* Long may we have our Internet to love.
  
## 65 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 8 Jan 15 12:53

    
*Some nice telephoto shots of the super-isolated, Stone-Age
Sentinelese here.  I don't give 'em good odds of staying off the
grid much longer, even if they've managed it for sixty thousand
years.

http://magazine.good.is/articles/isolated-sentinelese-people
  
## 66 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 14:53

    
io9.com has a feature on science stories that will make the news in
2015:
http://io9.com/these-are-the-science-stories-that-will-be-making-news-1678208928

Several space stories, including a couple about SpaceX. I'm already
packing to ride that Mars transport system.
  
## 67 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Thu 8 Jan 15 19:02

    
Sent by Stefan Jones via email:

I've been looking over @bruces' Casa Jasmina pictures. Man, Bruce,
Cory, and Gibson couldn't have collaboratively imagined a better
setting for a post industrial tech-mashup place. I hope it features
a drone that hovers around offering tetanus boosters to visitors, at
least during construction.

On good days, I think we're getting better at making environments
for ourselves. I remember, as a kid, enthusing over spaceship-pod
prefab homes that appeared in magazines. Now, reading about those
weird sports makes me feel glad that boxes with pointy roofs are
still around. Especially after reading Brand's _How Buildings
Learn._ Humble classically designed buildings allow for resuse and
adaptation and correcting mistakes.

I remember reading, in the SF Chron maybe 15 years back, an article
about a visit with an elderly woman still living in the
self-cleaning home her inventor husband had built in the 1960s (?).
The kind of one-off innovation  _Popular Mechanix_ might devote a
page of pictures and gushing copy to. The old lady would, by
appointment and payment, run the house through a cleaning cycle,
which involved shower heads turning on and drenching everything,
followed by blasts of hot air. Man, I'm so glad we dodged that kind
of house. Imagine limiting your furniture choices to things that are
waterproof and easily drained.
  
## 68 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 8 Jan 15 19:30

    


one last explication of what i was trying to point out: it's the 'how was it
made/with what feedstocks/under what labor and environmental conditions/how
was it transported/how much water and energy went into its production.'

i still remember a wonderful comment you made bruce on some viridian posting
about oil being wasted for energy when it is going to be needed for
feedstocks for pharmaceuticals and other made things.

stuff, particularly electronic stuff, has to be made from something --- and
often, nasty somethings (flame retardants! pvc! ook!)

i would just love it if some electrofuturist would begin to have the mindset
of the sustainable ag/permaculture folks: what are the inputs/where to do
they come from/what are their effects on the ecosystem (however defined) as
a whole/etc.

see so old-school silicon valley toxics coalition and 'imperial san
francisco'.


(back to my hideyhole and good luck with casa jasmina).
  
## 69 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 9 Jan 15 01:52

    


Well, that older industrial areas of Torino  are indeed rather
toxic, especially the very large, very abandoned
shipping-and-handling barns next to the older railroads.  It's just
brown-fields and gray-fields galore.  That's why it's a sacrifice
zone for contemporary technical speculation.   The Torino Fab Lab
gets their eldritch factory colossus from the city for what's
basically a peppercorn rent.

I'm with Stefan about the majesty of Brand's HOW BUILDINGS LEARN,
except that the oldest buildings are never the wisest ones.  In
Italy, the oldest buildings aren't living things that can learn. 
They're physical constructions harshly beset with entropy, they're
disasters of physics.  Even the strongest stone, the best-baked
brick. must corrode, pit, crack, crumble, disintegrate with time.  

Sometimes the Roman roads are still in amazing condition, but they
exist deep underground: the planet's iiving topsoil has risen around
them.  The earth's  very surface is unstable, especially in Italy. 
Even if a building learned as much as Socrates, it would still be
mortal.

So, in this  brief domestic electronics project for Arduino, we're
not building some Ruskinian temple to absolute spiritual values. 
Nope, it's a left-over, repurposed building where we can learn, and
even the stuff we do learn there will become obsolete really fast. 
It'll be like trying to live inside a working laser-printer.

But, that's how things really are in the new domestic Italian
landscape, and since we've made that bed, it's incumbent on us to
try to lie in that bed with some grace.   Italians are actually
quite good at this work.  They're entirely used to the issue.  The
aesthetic clash between stackable molded designer chairs and moldy
Baroque cathedrals doesn't bother them even a bit. 

I've learned a lot from the Italians in that regard.   They have
civilized me.   I can write about the ancient world with some ease
now, because I dwell in Julia Augusta Taurinorum, a walled
road-fortress founded in 27 BC.  The material culture of Taurinorum
really interests me: they're not spooky, remote "Ancient Romans,"
they're a modest, practical, industrious people in a pretty corner
of the world; our civilized neighbors, just not quite like we are.

Augusta Taurinorum left a lot of pollution, too, mind you.  Their
busted crockery, demolished Roman construction debris, useless
burned-up stuff, worn-out domestic bric-a-brac, their own interred
bones.  Quite unhealthy lifestyles: it was nothing to them to die
worn out at 45, toothless, bent, arthritic, and malnourished.  The
modern Turinese, sure, they live in an old,  much-polluted town, and
they're also enduring a Depression, but it's incredible how healthy
they are.   Their lifespans are second-to-none on the planet.  They
live practically forever, especially the women: there are stately
gals of 95 swanning around in the cafes with prosecco and
cigarettes.  

 Even my own health is great in Torino.   If I adopt to their way of
life,  there will likely be rather more future for me to personally
see.
  
## 70 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 15 04:57

    
(As I wrote this, it felt like a logical flow; hoping I don't appear
to be rambling...)

Avant Green architect Pliny Fisk
(http://www.austinchronicle.com/news/1995-07-07/533739/) once told
me that, to build a truly sustainable, healthy, zero-energy
building, you would ideally have complete knowledge of the
environment, down to the DNA of every insect living there. The
science of site analysis and building design could get there, though
it's an expensive proposition.

We too seldom think enough about overhead or context. I was just
reading
(http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/21/magazine/do-you-suffer-from-decision-fatigue.html) about the biological cost of decision-making:

"Willpower turned out to be more than a folk concept or a metaphor.
It really was a form of mental energy that could be exhausted. The
experiments confirmed the 19th-century notion of willpower being
like a muscle that was fatigued with use, a force that could be
conserved by avoiding temptation."

Somehow this occurred to me in thinking about building site context,
thinking of the overhead of site placement that we normally don't
consider. There's so much that humans haven't considered, though
we're thinking beings, and we generally don't see consideration and
thinking as having a limit or a cost. 

Some would rather not think too hard or know too much. We see a
rejection of science and cultural progressivism in some reactionary
parts of contemporary culture. Fundamentalist and traditionalist
reactions so prominent in today's world are a reaction to the human
overhead required by accelerating change
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerating_change), which manifests
as a visceral fear of change.

Thinking people are dismissive of reactionary culture, but we should
probably try to understand it and address it with therapy, rather
than engage in culture wars.

Charlie Hebdo wasn't attacked by "muslims," but, as Christopher
Dickey noted in a discussion on NPR yesterday, it was attacked by
three ignorant, reactionary assholes with guns. Terrorism is not
necessarily a conspiracy at scale, though we do have movements like
ISIS and Al Qaeda, to name a couple. We have to be careful not to
interpret the actions of disturbed individuals as acts of war.
Dickey went on to note that, of the billion plus Muslims in the
world today, only a tiny fraction are militant fundamentalists.
  
## 71 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 15 06:50

    
Correction re. the Charlie Hebdo attack: two assholes with guns,
evidently with a driver. The suspects are Islamist brothers, Cherif
and Said Kouachi. Apparently they do have Al Qaeda connections (Said
was apparently trained by Al Qaeda). 

JADP Dept.:

As of 2011, there were 7.7 million Muslims in France (~11% of the
population)  (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Islam_in_France). 

Muslims in France and Worldwide have condemned the attack:
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/07/muslims-respond-charlie-hebdo_n_6429710.html
  
## 72 of 198: Halleluja (jonl) Fri 9 Jan 15 08:48

    
A question via email from Halleluja:

Bruce, do you see as inevitable (or desirable) a democratization of
ubiquitous surveillance? Since I read your thought experiment about
Google acquiring the NSA I've tried to see beyond my own
hand-wringing over erosion of privacy. In Tomorrow Now you wrote
about the corrosive effects of powerful spooks working in the
shadows. What might be desirable about everyone having access to
everyone's data everywhere? "Privacy" seems like water in a sieve
now; could universal sunlight mitigate the corrosive effects of
unequal access to data? How weird might it be to have such intimate
knowledge of one another in real time? What stabilizing effects
might evolve from such a situation?
  
## 73 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Fri 9 Jan 15 09:55

    <scribbled by satyr Fri 9 Jan 15 09:58>
  
## 74 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Fri 9 Jan 15 10:04

    
Thought I had breaking news.  Turns out it was more than three
months old.
  
## 75 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Fri 9 Jan 15 22:44

    
The problem with the idea of "democratized surveillance" is that it doesn't
advance any kind of theory about how existing power imbalances will be
remediated -- not exacerbated -- by it.

As we saw with the Eric Gartner case, the existence of evidence -- while a
necessary precondition for justice -- is no guarantee of justice in and of
itself.

As an increasingly small number of people hold increasingly large amounts of
wealth -- and thus influence over legislation, norms, media and
infrastructure -- the normalization of everyone spying on everyone else is
likely to advantage that cohort even further (in the absence of a
complementary larger program explicitly aimed at advancing wider causes of
justice and equality.

Most of the reason we don't spy on each other right now is normative, not
technological or legal. It's not technically challenging or legally risky to
sit at your window with a telescope, staring into your neighbors' bedrooms.
The reason most of us don't do this is because of a wide consensus that
people who do that kind of thing are creepy assholes.

Fronting surveillance "from below" as a legitimate action in and of itself
will weaken that "creepy asshole" perception. It's one thing to say, "People
who whip out phones and record police brutality are on the side of
righteousness." It's another to say, "I'm gonna record everyone I see, put a
streaming cam on my front door pointing at the sidewalk, etc, because I want
to protect myself."

The ACLU wrote an excellent, nuanced statement about police bodycams:

https://www.aclu.org/technology-and-liberty/police-body-mounted-cameras-right-policies-place-win-all

{tl,dr: you need policies as well as cameras}

And I wrote this:

http://www.forbes.com/2007/06/11/urban-surveillance-security-biz-21cities_cx_cd_0611futurecity.html
  
## 76 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 15 00:19

    
Yeah, what Cory said, about the power imbalances.  "Surveiilance"
isn't the same thing as "awareness."   The mechanisms of the
recording media may be technically and objectively identical, but
things get "seen" within different political contexts.  

 If  I'm snooping through people's bedroom windows with my
telescope, it's not because I'm an anthropologist, or a designer
doing user observation studies.  I'm seeking an illicit thrill
because I've violating social norms and it gives me a feeling of
voyeuristic power over the observed.

Last year, during the SOTW, I wrote an essay about the  basic
weakness of real surveillance societies, of totalitarian police
states.  Even though they spy on stuff incessantly, they don't *see*
stuff.  People aren't allowed to notice what's actually going on
lived experience.  It's very hard to get anything useful and
constructive accomplished under those conditions; the society
doesn't prosper, it's poor.   The "surveillance" doesn't get
important people up to speed with what's happening; it's not
journalism or statistics.   Totalitarian spying is destructive
tittle-tattle, abused for purposes of  palace intrigue.  

It's like trying to hire spies to paint your house.  The spies are
very sharp-eyed, but it's all about:  "I found a dirty corner! 
Look, there's a scary spiderweb on the ceiling!"  Where is the fresh
paint?  Every house in Stalin's Moscow looks morbid and gray.  And
does Stalin even notice the greatest real threat to his power: that
Hitler's about to kick his ass?  No: he's got plenty of clues, but
he doesn't notice them.
  
## 77 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 15 00:21

    
On the subject of creepy assholes, here's an excellent work of
satirical design fiction on the subject of, well, creepy assholes. 
This video is about Silicon Valley's habits of glibly chipping,
chipping, chipping away at social norms of privacy in order to line
their own pockets.   Hey look: the sewer is a network, too! Why not
monitor the network?  It's modern, it's helpful, privacy is dead,
get over it!

http://youtu.be/DJklHwoYgBQ
  
## 78 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 15 01:00

    
Question by Halleluja:

"What might be desirable about everyone having access to
everyone's data everywhere? "Privacy" seems like water in a sieve
now; could universal sunlight mitigate the corrosive effects of
unequal access to data? How weird might it be to have such intimate
knowledge of one another in real time? What stabilizing effects
might evolve from such a situation?

*Well, this is a David Brin issue; he's a sci-fi writer, so he's
quite keen on this neat, paradoxical, sci-fi table-turning plot
twist approach in which we're just as powerful as the NSA if we've
somehow all got the NSA's cameras.

*I don't doubt that Silicon Valley would love to have the NSA's
hardware and software.  They'd cheerfully throw a hundred Snowdens
to the dogs for the chance to privatize and commercialize that vast
secret taxpayer-finances apparatus.  They'd "democratize" the
"access" in their rather rough and ready Stack fashion, much like
"you" have all the "access" to everything in iTunes.  Because, wow,
iTunes is all about pleasing you, the almighty consumer.  The
problem is that the idea is fraudulent; you're not a citizen of
iTunes. You have no structure of rights within iTunes.

*The David Brin solution to the existent state of the Stone Age
Sentinelese is to equip them all with telephoto cameras.  Okay, what
about the interests of the Sentinelese?  They're not participants. 
If we use the "everybody's data everywhere" argument, it sidelines
anyone anywhere who doesn't want to participate in the
data-crunching.  The spooks and geeks have napalmed the public
sphere in their own power-struggle.

Who's the "Us" in the democratic "Us" versus "Them" here?  There's a
lot of non-"us" in that "us," people who are neatly amputated
because the whole issue becomes a squabble over the almighty
keyboard.   Civility is't just about how you treat political
competitors.  It's also about how you treat the entities who must
necessarily exist in your civilization but aren't grabbing the
steering wheel:  children, the elderly, foreigners, the sick, the
mentally retarded… even domestic animals and crop plants. How are
they supposed to exist under conditions of radical surveillance
ubiquity?  They're just as surveilled as the geek/spook
power-players, but they will never get any look-in.  They are sub
humanized.
  
## 79 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 15 01:02

    

*This happens to be a major issue in my Turinese smart house
project.  What's a home without a two-year-old?  Kids live in homes.
But everybody who's had a two-year-old around knows that her primary
response to technology is "why can't Mr Fork and Miss Wall Socket be
friends?" Kids are not deft power users.  Kids are naive,
exploratory, rambunctious.

*But how are the welfare, the interests, of two-year-olds reflected
in that system's design?  

*You can look at the commercials for existent smart-house systems
and you can see that it's all about relentless, remote-control,
helicopter-cop parental suppression of the kids.  Every aspect of
that system is designed to coax money from potential buyers, by
intensifying Mom's kid-safety anxieties and playing to Dad's
early-adopter geek control fetish.   

*I have never yet seen a smart-home design that would make a
two-year-old happier and healthier.   They're not about "smartness,"
they are frozen digital reifications of the power relationships that
are already there.
  
## 80 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 10 Jan 15 01:06

    
*Check out this promotional video, for one instance among a great
many.  Look at who gets to "see" whose face here, with the aid of
computer-vision system.  It's allegedly all about the warm and cozy
home life, but who gets recognized and who doesn't get recognized? 
This system is a face-filter hooked to nagware.  

*Where's the Brin solution for the household here, where family life
has been (as Adam Greenfield once deftly put it) "reified with a
clunky intensity?"  The warmth and ease of existent family life is
harmed because the geek-spook power has been clustered exclusively
around the purchaser.

*Do the kids get a message whenever Mom might arrive?  Can the kids
sneak their own friends into the house?  The kids used to have that
informal privilege, but in the new regime, that's been pruned off as
neatly as iTunes prunes tape-swapping.

https://www.netatmo.com/en-US/product/camera#view3
  
## 81 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 10 Jan 15 01:48

    
"Civility is't just about how you treat political competitors. It's also
about how you treat the entities who must necessarily exist in your
civilization but aren't grabbing the steering wheel"

This is why the term "taxpayer" is such a poor substitute for "people" (as
in, "we must respect the taxpayers' right to have an accountable education
system"). It implies that your relationship to the state is as a customer,
and that the "better" a customer you are (the more you spend) the more
legitimacy should be imparted to your priorities and views on the state.

Some of the people with the most intense relationship to the state pay no
tax at all: the elderly, children, prisoners... If we link your right to
steer the state to the extent to which you pay into the state, then none of
these people have *any* rights, and these are the people who have the most
need to have affirmative rights in relationship to the government.

This is why it's obnoxious to tell a cop (or other employee) that "I pay
your salary, you know." Not because that means that you aren't getting value
for money, but because it implies that the police's primary duty is to
supply a competitive service in a marketplace of coercive force -- not to
uphold the rule of law as laid down by a legitimate, democratic state. "I
have inalienable rights because I'm a human being" may be more of a
mouthful, but it is far more true than any nonsense about who is paying
whose salary.

Here's an example of how the state *should* work to affirm the rights of
people on the grounds that they're humans, not as a customer-loyalty
program:

http://boingboing.net/2013/12/10/uk-kids-have-the-right-to-opt.html
  
## 82 of 198: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Sat 10 Jan 15 06:47

    
I'd rather have video of an assault than not have it.

I'd rather have my own video camera than need to rely on
police or municipal ones.

Yes it's necessary but not sufficient. It's also inevitable,
because the cameras will get smaller and cheaper until it's
considered weird to not have one, just like it's now weird
to not have a cellphone.

Discussing whether or not people *should* wear lapel cams is
not interesting - they will. More interesting would be discussing
what's public space and what's private space, and how do we
enforce the distinction.

iOn SnapCam: <http://www.cnet.com/pictures/action-cam-maker-ion-gets-into-wearables-with-the-tiny-snapcam-pictures/>
1.5" square, tap once for a still pic, twice for video, three times
to stream. Should sell for $150. Next year, $50. Year after that, one
will come with your new phone, no separate charge.
  
## 83 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 10 Jan 15 08:57

    
"Discussing whether or not people *should* wear lapel cams is
 not interesting - they will."

Lots of people own telescopes. Most of us don't point them through our
neighbors' windows.

The technology's adoption may be foregone conclusion, but its use is not.
  
## 84 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Sat 10 Jan 15 09:08

    
I suspect that the widespread use of dash cameras in Russia is a good
example of mass civilian surveilance.  WIRED did a short article on
them last year after the meteor strike in Russia:
<http://www.wired.com/2013/02/russian-dash-cams/>

The cameras aren't coordinated in any way except for time and
location, after an event it's easy for people to volunteer (or hide)
their recording of the event.
  
## 85 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 10 Jan 15 10:00

    
My concern about surveillance isn’t about cameras or wiretaps or
“celltaps,” it’s about algorithms. Consider that there are 327
million or more cellphones in the U.S., more than one per person.
It’s theoretically possible to gather and retain data on cellular
communications, most practically metadata about location and
connection. Storage restrictions probably limit the amount of data
it’s reasonable to persist, but data’s being collected, stored, and
made accessible to various law enforcement agencies. They may be
searching for specific numbers and zeroing in on proximities and
movements - doing some granular tracking. But you could also make
broader use of the data if you had sophisticated algorithms for
pattern analysis. 

Law enforcement reps may tell you that they would only use the
cellular data they collect to catch crooks. But considering
Watergate, what might Nixon have done with a lot of data and some
smart algorithms? 

And where cameras are concerned, I’m sure the algorithms for
analyzing visual data are smart and getting smarter. 

Smarter analysis isn’t fail-safe, we’ll almost certainly have some
number of Archibald Buttle incidents. (Buttle was the cobbler,
because of a literal bug in the bureaucratic process,  accidentally
jailed, tortured, and killed in the film "Brazil"). 

But surveillance analysis can also be a thumb on the scale of our
supposedly democratic system of justice.
  
## 86 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Sat 10 Jan 15 10:11

    
> analyzing visual data are smart and getting smarter. 

I think it will always get smarter, the bit we're not ready for is how
much cheaper it is.  License plate tracking in the US is something the
average person probably doesn't know much about and it's gone from an
expensive project I worked on in the mid 90s to something every local
law enforcement agency can deploy.

ALCU has a good summary of how the use of plate readers in the US:
<https://www.aclu.org/alpr>.  However, they don't address what happens
when an officer can go from a license plate to the Internet while
they're driving down the street.

Last month a friend of mine was visiting a relative in another state
and they had some car problems that put them on the side of the road.
Officer stopped to help sort things out and while that was happening
my friend noticed that their personal web site was on display in the
police car's laptop.
  
## 87 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 10 Jan 15 15:48

    
Got this via email from my friend Joseph Rowe, who is (among other
things) a musician living in France and performing with his wife,
Catherine Braslavsky. Quoted with permission. He had attached some
of the Charlie Hebdo cartoons, but the WELL doesn't have image
support per se, so I can't add them here.

Joseph's letter:

        Please forgive the group mail, but since many of you who live in
the Anglophone world have asked me about the horror of January 7th,
2015, and its bloody aftermath (as I began to write this, I learned
that the murderers were finally caught and killed by police), and
since I often meet the public in my work, I thought you (even those
who haven't heard from me for awhile) might like to hear my take on
how it feels to be living in Paris at this traumatic time.
 
        _Charlie Hebdo_ (hebdo is slang for weekly) isn't some tiny,
offbeat humor mag --- it has long been a part of the lives of all
Parisians with dissident and progressive worldviews, and many other
readers as well. It was always pushing the limits, managing to
offend, at one time or another, every imaginable worldview and taste
(it even succeeded in disgusting me on a few occasions, which isn't
easy to do ...) Charlie wasn't exactly a source of deep wisdom, but
it was absolutely brilliant and hilarious, and I cherished its
existence, and often bought it.  One cowardly, barbaric act of
organized insanity not only murdered its whole staff, it thereby
decimated the elite community of France's most talented cartoonists.
The artists ranged in age from 40 (Charb, editor of the magazine) to
80 (Wolinski, who is one of my all-time favorite cartoonists
anywhere). 

        Catherine and I happen to be in the middle of a run of nightly
performances of _De Jérusalem à Cordoue (From Jerusalem to
Cordoba)_, returning this season after a 10-year long absence in
Paris. After over 450 performances in 6 countries (though mostly in
France) it has acquired a small reputation as a kind of message of
peace, religious tolerance, and unity --- perhaps especially because
it had its première in the aftermath of 9-11, and emphasizes the
peace-loving, mystical, Sufic side of Islam (which of course is
Islam's true meaning). Because of this, some people (not many!) went
so far as to wonder if we might do better to cancel or suspend
performances until things calm down, due to the strong emotions
currently running in the French psychosphere. But we didn't even
consider such a thing. To do so would be to concede to forces of
darkness, reaction, and fear. And as it turned out, we've had good
audiences and very moving feedback. Above all, we're happy to report
that the general French reaction to this horror has been one of
unprecedented solidarity, courage, and intelligence.  (The Imam of
France not only condemned the act in the strongest terms, but
characterized the victims as "martyrs for freedom".) I've rarely
seen this country (with its multiple ethnic communities and its own
well-known anarchic tendencies) so united, including the Muslim
community. In other words, the reaction is exactly the opposite of
what the assassins and their equally insane puppet-masters hoped
for. When I learned yesterday (hearing a gigantic peal of church
bells coming from the direction of Notre-Dame) that the Diocese of
Paris was holding a major mass for the victims, I was both deeply
touched and amused --- many Catholics had been outraged by Charlie's
caricatures of Christianity (the Pope was one of their favorite
targets.)

        Before our performances, I made this announcement:

        _Nous voudrions dédier cette représentation aux martyrs de la
liberté d'expression. Dans les textes du spectacle de ce soir, on
retrouve des mots comme "Dieu" ou "Allah." Pour nous, le sens de ces
mots n'a absolument aucun rapport avec les mêmes sons dans la bouche
d'un extrêmiste._

        Trans: We wish to dedicate this performance to the martyrs for
freedom of speech. In the texts of tonight's performance, one may
hear words such as "God" or "Allah." For us, the meaning of these
words has absolutely no relation to the same sounds in the mouths of
extremists.
  
## 88 of 198: david gault (dgault) Sat 10 Jan 15 16:47

    

yeah, I have to disagree that cost of storage is a
factor limiting the analysis of 327 million pocket
sized input streams.

Any takers on the idea that surveillance as it exists
today is an early step in assessing global rates
of demand for resources, and will be used to award
resources to those deemed most productive/deserving by 
the algorithm of the week?  

The middle class isn't dying, it's exploding.  
We'll need to manage consumption or we're toast.

<bruces>, very happy to hear about your civilized life
in Torino.  You deserve it. 
  
## 89 of 198: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Sat 10 Jan 15 19:46

    
Facial recognition used to be exclusive to national security orgs. Now
Facebook offers it to everyone, within their walled garden. Not too much
longer until it escapes from the garden. All sorts of new apps become
possible when your phone can not just record but realtime-identify
everyone around you.
  
## 90 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Sat 10 Jan 15 19:49

    
Apple offers it to OS X customers as part of their photo apps. 
  
## 91 of 198: Diane Brown (debunix) Sat 10 Jan 15 19:57

    <scribbled by debunix Sat 10 Jan 15 19:58>
  
## 92 of 198: Hallelujah (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 04:50

    
More via email from Hallelujah:

"Democratization of ubiquitous surveillance" is something of an
oxymoron then. The feeling of omniscience I get when using Google
masks the power imbalance that I'm actually exacerbating by using
Google (or not). But that genie's out of the bottle, right? People
who are able will deploy some privacy enhancement techniques, but
the continuing trend will be what McLuhan called "psychic surgery
without anesthetic" on the whole human race.

The street has its own uses for the spooky tools as they trickle
down and become more pervasive and automated. Like Cory says, the
reasons most of us don't literally look through people's
walls--yet--are normative, not technological. Employers, parents and
potential dating partners routinely check people out already though,
to the extent they can do so surreptitiously. What I want to ask is
how will society evolve in response to widespread use of, for
example, some advanced and invisible version of Google Glass that
provides hyperaugmentation of the user's physical and intellectual
perceptions. Do persons and objects become numinous to the viewer
when he can fine-tune his expert system of second sight, when his
machines can predict with high precision other people's emotions and
thoughts and proximate actions in real time? Does a child's backyard
become Encyclopedia Brittanica? Is the floor of the cage widened? Or
is totalitarianism so enabled that it comes, inevitably and
inexorably?
  
## 93 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 04:59

    
"I have to disagree that cost of storage is a factor limiting the
analysis of 327 million pocket sized input streams."

That's not exactly what I said. I was talking about a potential
practical limit on the persistence of data, not the analysis. That
might be more of an indirect limit, in that the scope of analysis
could have  temporal limitation.

Re-reading what I posted, I did get something ~wrong: I said it was
theoretically possible, but the metadata, at least, is being
gathered, stored, and provided to law enforcement agencies. There
are so many law enforcement requests for cellular metadata that
providers have created whole divisions to service those requests. In
many states and at the Federal level, there's movement to require
judicial oversight, in the form of a warrant, to obtain the data.
Currently agencies can get the data via subpoena.
  
## 94 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 05:22

    
Spending the day going through entries for the Turinese electronic
art fair.  Normally they are screamingly leftwing political,
everything critically abrasive and subversive.  Scarcely a whisper
of that in the entries this year.  There seems to be a weird vogue
for electronic things done with potted plants.  I wonder what
happened to the European tech-art community.
  
## 95 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 05:29

    
*A top fed, Edith Ramirez, weighs in on the "significant risks" of
the Internet of Things.  A speech from the floor of the Consumer
Electronics Show in Las Vegas, which is where the feds have to go on
pilgrimage nowadays just like everybody else.

http://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/public_statements/617191/150106cesspeech.pdf
  
## 96 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 08:45

    
I'm fascinated by human diversity.

Real people:
http://www.humansofnewyork.com/
"...  daily glimpses into the lives of strangers in New York City."

http://www.juxtapoz.com/photography/taxi-by-mike-harvey
"I wanted to document the lottery of people that occupied the taxi
space, and the experiences that taxi driving gave me. Whether it be
rushing a pregnant woman to hospital or being regaled stories of
World War II by an elderly passenger, the taxi provided a space to
meet, converse with, and learn from people."
  
## 97 of 198: Dave Waite (dwaite) Sun 11 Jan 15 09:41

    
I posted this in another conference, but thought you might want to
weigh in on this article from the Chicago Tribune this Sunday
Morning...

Why does Marriott want to jam your Wi-Fi?
Phil Rosenthal
CHICAGO TRIBUNE
philrosenthal&#8203;@chicagotribune.com
1/10/15
Marriott and the hotel industry's American Hospitality & Lodging
Association are asking that the Federal Communications Commission —
and by extension, all of us — trust them when it comes to what they
want to do with Wi-Fi access on their premises.

If you have reservations, they'd like you to cancel them.

But as this is the travel business, be forewarned this change may
cost you.
The hotels say they want to be allowed to monitor and control how
customers connect to the Internet with their laptops and other
portable devices. They say they would never render all but their own
Wi-Fi services inoperative unless it was absolutely necessary to
thwart cybersecurity threats.
--snip--
The argument lodging people make is they want to be able to monitor
and, if necessary, jam Wi-Fi hot spots used in their meeting and
conference spaces that aren't authorized and can be used or co-opted
to hack a computer or device.
"Hotels need to be able to protect the personal data and information
of their guests," Maryam Cope, the industry lobbying group's vice
president of government affairs, said in a statement.

"Our petition asks the FCC to provide clear rules so that hotels can
take all reasonable steps necessary to manage and protect their
guest's data without fear of legal penalty."

Through this prism, it's all in the name of security, like an
in-room safe, an amenity some may find of dubious value for which
some hotels charge guests regardless of whether they're ever used.


"The question at hand is what measures a network operator can take
to detect and contain rogue and impostor Wi-Fi hot spots," Marriott
said. "The entire hotel industry is seeking clarity from the FCC
regarding what lawful measures a network operator can take to
prevent such attacks from occurring."
--snip-
Giants are lined up on either side because of the stakes.

Cisco is with the hotels.

Google and Microsoft are opposed.
--snip--

<http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/columnists/ct-rosenthal-wifi-0111-biz-20150110-column.html?dssReturn&z=60613>

or
<https://tinyurl.com/mnds7zn>

registration may be required.
  
## 98 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 09:50

    
http://www.petnet.io

*A great example of pets in the "connected home" being shifted from
the status of household family members to automatons.  

*Gizmos like this should be a positive boon to crazy cat-ladies. 
With a phalanx of those devices and a budget, you could adopt and
feed four or five hundred semi-feral stray cats and scarcely have to
leave your walker.
  
## 99 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 10:08

    
*The ever-surprising Pope is getting mothers to breastfeed inside
the Sistine Chapel.

http://news.yahoo.com/pope-francis-breastfeed-sistine-chapel-164950638.html
  
## 100 of 198: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Sun 11 Jan 15 12:30

    

howdy, folks, i'm just catching up here and have a few things to throw into
the conversation. 

jonl, Stefan Jones, evy, and others were discussing aspects of smart homes.
for a while, i blogged for Syfy.com, a column loosely associated with their
show Eureka. one of my first pieces was about Frances Gabe of Newberg,
Oregon. i hasten to point out that no, the self-cleaning house she came up
with was not designed by the inventor husband that Stefan thought he
remembered from a newspaper article: Frances grew up in the construction
industry and is entirely responsible for her invention. 

Syfy kept my blog around after Eureka went off the air, but alas, looks
like the archives aren't around any more, or i'd direct you there. i can
direct you to this link: http://www.csmonitor.com/1982/0512/051235.html 
and quote from it: 

"The inventor says she has been a builder for as long as she can remember,
visiting her contractor-father at work sites at the age of three. As a
result she has worked as a builder for most of her adult life. She also has
found time for such artistic things as sculpture and painting.....Mrs. Gabe
lives alone in her studio - with her two dogs, Megan and Saxon - doing
nearly all the construction work herself. She attributes her inventiveness
to what she calls ''round vision,'' explaining: ''When I look at your face,
I see the back of your head.''
  
## 101 of 198: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Sun 11 Jan 15 12:41

    

another question had to do with the naming of "SARAH," the smart house in
the show Eureka. her name was actually S.A.R.A.H., fwiw, for Self Actuated
Residential Automated Habitat. i don't know which of the show's creators
and writers named her, but they did have a few significant female writers,
which isn't often the case in TV. i interviewed at least one of them for my
blog. the house's character was voiced by the same male actor who played a
hilarious, loveable nerd character in the show, one who essentially grows
up during the course of the show, becoming more mature and more, for lack
of a better word, human, as time goes on. 

i believe S.A.R.A.H.'s Twitter feed, which was popular among many Syfy
fans, was written by various writers, both screenwriters and hacks like me
employed by the marketing side of content, but i may be mixing that up with
some other gig.

for those who haven't seen the show, perhaps a little context is in order:
Eureka intentionally embraced and lampooned decades of television cliches.
the lead character is even a sheriff, though his town is a wacky high-tech
sci-fi Brigadoon instead of Mayberry. S.A.R.A.H. is used as a plot device
and to comedic effect; in one episode, she behaves like a pouty, jealous
wife. though the show wasn't completely enlightened by any means, it did
feature an African-American woman as its most powerful character, and the
white guy sheriff's right-hand man, who was a genius to the sheriff's
down-home not-so-smartiness, was also African-American. 

not sure how relevant all that is to the conversation, but... whatever.
there you have it. 
  
## 102 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 12:57

    
When you're talking about the State of the World, everything is
relevant to the conversation. 

And Eureka had its own very peculiar perspective on that State, from
an idealized community perspective ... from a town that's 90% Mr.
Peabody, 10% Sherman. That town was a little like the early
Internet, a community full of writers, hackers, artists, and poets.
Big emphasis on the hackers, though.

Eureka had only three cops, and one was a cyborg.
  
## 103 of 198: Tiffany Lee Brown's Moustache (magdalen) Sun 11 Jan 15 13:09

    

i'm a fan of these annual bruce-and-jon fests, and it's really nice to see
cory around these parts, too. but here and elsewhere on the WELL, there are
some voices wondering why women's voices and concerns aren't represented
here. i have to admit, when i first saw the lineup and told my husband
about it (he's a big fan of bruce's futurism-ish writing), i breezily set
it up with the caveat, "It's the usual sort of thing, you know, the experts
are all white guys..." not even as a criticism, just as a way of
introducing the conversation. i like these guys. i've known them personally
in some ways, in some situations, over the course of decades. i don't fault
them for being white or privileged or male or smart or this or that. but i
think it does merit conversation and *acknowledgement*, the fact that we
are culturally programmed to set up certain people to be our experts, and
we then give them forums in which to show their knowledge and spread their
ideas. (next year, maybe ask Genevieve Bell to sit in for a spell?)

so, i appreciate that women have tried to be heard in this conversation,
like fom, evy, and loris. i also appreciate jon's post #64, in which he
acknowledges that he doesn't have the answers to everything and may have
misinterpreted evy's original question/critique. 

and i would still like to see a much more thoughtful answer to paulina's
questions about the larger environmental effects of our continued,
inevitable march toward progress. specifically, she has asked about the
materials sourced to make the digital and electronic stuff required by
retro-futuristic advances such as smart homes, even ones like bruce's guest
house in Torino. bruce sort-of addressed the issue in responses #50-51, but
sort-of seemed to conclude that it isn't an area he's focusing on. (? well,
that's how i read it.)

i'd like to rephrase, and throw it at all three of our assembled experts: 

- Is the treadmill of obsolecence and Moore's Law-style progress
contributing significantly to the demise of our planet's ecosystem, in your
opinion? (e.g., faster chips, smaller phones, a house that requires a fast
chip on every door handle and a wi-fi-equipped thermometer/hygrometer in
every fridge, and a marketing and packaging infrastructure to support the
continuing rollout of these inventions...)

- If so, do you feel a personal responsibility to change the course of that
treadmill? Whoops, bad metaphor. Treadmills don't go anywhere, right? Ah,
maybe my metaphor's not so bad after all. 

- If you do think it's contributing to environmental problems, and you do
feel some personal responsibility, as a person who has been blessed with
smarts, communication abilities, and the power that goes along with being
deemed an expert, to do something about it: What are the top three ways
that you, personally in your everyday life, can make the situation better?
What are the top three ways that others can also work to change it? I
sincerely hope that you guys, or someone else in the conversation, has
something better to say here than "I compost and re-use old floorboards in
my house construction, therefore I am absolved of worrying about why I'm
buying the next latest iPhone," which tends to be the lame-o way that I
answer these questions. 
  
## 104 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 14:41

    

*Hey, I'm 105% percent for the Loris and Genevieve Bell Futurist
Show.  If the two of 'em somehow promise to take over my grueling
State of the World duties, I'll quit typing pronto, I promise. 
You'll probably want to warn them that the salary's not all that
great.

*Since it's just been made clear that Lebkowsky and me can't be
women, it's probably high time that some Gamergaters show up here to
decry that sudden outburst of aggressive Cultural Marxism.  I've
been wondering when they'd point out to us here that Charlie Hebdo's
coverage of the gaming industry was manifestly corrupt.  That's
probably the real source of the biggest street demo since the end of
World War II.
 
  
## 105 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 15:08

    
http://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2014-12-31/for-the-wealthiest-political-donors-it-was-a-very-good-year

*You know who'd be a great woman to query about the contemporary
State of The World?  Laurene Powell Jobs.  Because she's the only
woman in this list of men who are buying the American government
wholesale. 
  
## 106 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 15:35

    
*That was one hell of a public demo in Paris, by the way.  It was
basically a social-media flash mob with all the major heads of state
in Europe standing in front of it, pretending to be the Black Bloc. 
It was like some weird echo of 1968 with a limping, leftie DeGaulle
leading the reluctant, sobbing street rebels. 

http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/01/11/paris-rally-je-suis-charlie-hebdo-terrorism_n_6451414.html

*People in Europe are wigging out over this incident.  Of course
they won't do anything constructive, because this is Europe, but one
can sense from the tone of the tame press that every power broker in
Europe is going to cynically exploit this opportunity to make a
sudden lunge for some hot slice of the pie.  Nobody's learned
anything or changed their minds about anything at all, but they're
one and all convinced that the massacre strongly favors their
analysis.  They'll all be amazed when they realize that their
traditional opponents are just as reckless and emboldened.  It's
like being a Tumblr Social Justice Warrior who meets somebody from
4Chan.

*In the meantime, the Americans are still wondering if maybe it's
okay to called sliced potatoes "French fries."  Years of Depression
have broken people's faith in globalization.  They still parrot the
old Whole World slogans but their true feelings are really
polarized, exclusivist, narrow and parochial.  It's a "globalization
of Balkanization," as Jasmina likes to put it.
  
## 107 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 15:42

    
What will people say about all this in the 22nd Century?  Remember
me mentioning that prospect earlier, before the fishmonger and his
brother shot all the cartoonist?  THE 22ND CENTURY.  Nobody says a
word about it, it's still awaiting us, in all its grand, grey,
ghastly, Stapledonian glory.
  
## 108 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 15:44

    <scribbled by jonl Sun 11 Jan 15 16:12>
  
## 109 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 15:59

    
"Nobody's learned anything or changed their minds about anything at
all, but they're one and all convinced that the massacre strongly
favors their analysis."

It's a weird reaction, in a way. Earlier I mentioned Christopher
Dickey's comments that those shooters were "just a couple of jerks
with guns," but they aimed, fired, and hit a global nerve.
  
## 110 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 16:13

    
(Bruce slipped in with some posts while I was writing this response
to Tiffany. I also scribbled the original to make a correction.)

Tiffany, I've started several responses to your point about
"including women's voices," but they just seem lame. We're not
trying to be everything to everybody, is the best I can say. And
we're not closing the door on other people, including women, who
show up. I'm happy, actually honored, to see your post here. 

So, to your first question:

"Is the treadmill of obsolescence and Moore's Law-style progress
contributing significantly to the demise of our planet's ecosystem,
in your opinion?"

I'd say it differently: we're making the planet less
human-habitable; it's the demise of the human race we should be
thinking about. I'm increasingly pessimistic about the human future.
We may be past a point of no return. If I'm hopeful, it's that we'll
innovate our way out of the mess we're creating.
  
## 111 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 16:41

    
http://techcrunch.com/2015/01/10/east-of-palo-altos-eden/

*The racial history of Silicon Valley.

*From here in the Balkans, widely noted for ethnic cleansing, this
is truly a strange, exotic story.  Mostly because the real-estate
system in the Balkans has never been sophisticated enough to manage
a Californian squeeze-play of this description.
  
## 112 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 16:51

    
*I don't follow a lot of jihadis on Twitter, but they're around. 
They're truly exhilarated by the Charlie Hebdo thing, they feel no
sense of dread at having lethally offended hundreds of millions of
indignant, self-righteous Europeans.  

On the contrary, they're like:  At last, the Crusaders are waking
up!  We've taught them a good, healthy lesson now! We've got their
attention for our major issue, they'll know better than to blaspheme
our Prophet henceforth, and mankind in general will be able to
breathe free without the existential perversion of some French
cartoons.
  
## 113 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 17:02

    
"Is the treadmill of obsolescence and Moore's Law-style progress
contributing significantly to the demise of our planet's ecosystem,
in your opinion?"

*From the perspective of the 22nd Century?  They don't even
recognize that use of language.  "Moore?"  Who was that obscure
figure?  They don't even remember that period term "ecosystem."

*They'd probably be pretty interested in the archaic metaphor
"treadmill."  A real, fully authentic treadmill was a horrible 19th
century prison punishment device, but in the 22nd century so much
time has passed that the horror fades.  So a treadmill can only
perceived as Gothically romantic, like an Iron Maiden, or a rack, or
water-boarding.

*I'll be a little less arch here, and state that the
Internet-of-Things won't destroy everything. It won't have the time,
it's too temporary. Nuclear weapons and carbon pollution and nano
tech and GMO and gray goo and robots, that's stuff of the caliber
that can destroy everything.  The IoT is a fad.  You'll outlive it
-- just like you outlived the WELL as a Bulletin Board System.
  
## 114 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 17:20

    
*Here are the Iranians, with their usual self-lacerating
instability, though they look mighty hale and hearty now compared to
their bleeding neighbors and Shiite clients in Afghanistan, Iraq,
Syria and Lebanon.

*Some vaguely interesting palace intrigue in the weblink here, but
look at the chic Western-style designer eyeglasses on that guy. 
Everybody in  his regime's got the close-cropped beard, the bleached
and starched turban -- so the eyeglasses, that's the only narrow
window of personal expression that he's got to offer to the voters. 


http://www.rferl.org/content/iran-referendums-irgc-rouhani-reforms/26779709.html

*I guess he's lucky those specs aren't Google Glass, or somebody in
Tel Aviv and/or Washington would have bent every effort to hack 'em.
  
## 115 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 17:29

    
Those jihadis on Twitter are in for it now that Anonymous has their
number:
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/anonymous-declares-war-terrorists-paris-attack-article-1.2073193

They're gonna be Fawkesed.
  
## 116 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 11 Jan 15 17:38

    
Meanwhile, are the Charlie Hebdo cartoonists swooning over the
sudden surge of support? 

"We vomit on all these people who suddenly say they are our
friends,” sez Charlie Hebdo cartoonist Bernard Holtrop.
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/charlie-hebdo-cartoonist-scoffs-vomits-supporters-article-1.2072906

“It really makes me laugh. A few years ago, thousands of people took
to the streets in Pakistan to demonstrate against Charlie Hebdo.
They didn't know what it was. Now it's the opposite. But if people
are protesting to defend freedom of speech, naturally that's a good
thing."
  
## 117 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 11 Jan 15 17:40

    
*Speaking of surprising Popes: a bitterly combative Texan crank, who
gleefully melts icecaps and thinks Jesus rode to temple on a
dinosaur, is in control of NASA in 2015.

http://www.theverge.com/2015/1/11/7528337/senator-ted-cruz-nasa-subcommittee

*Don't try decrying Ted as a white guy, 'cause he'll play his
Canadian Hispanic card.
  
## 118 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sun 11 Jan 15 22:15

    
I like Juan Cole's take on the Jihadi tactics in the Hedbo shooting:


http://boingboing.net/2015/01/08/sharpening-the-contradictions.html

tl;dr: French muslims are pretty apolitical and irreligious. Whatever
problems they have, they don't perceive either Islamism or Islam as the
answer. But if terror attacks can provoke explicitly racialized, explicitly
religion-grounded reprisals against French muslims, then the jihadis' cause,
with its muslims-versus-Westernism rhetoric, becomes much more plausible.

Stalinists called this "sharpening the contradictions."
  
## 119 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sun 11 Jan 15 22:22

    
Two takes on storage versus mass surveillance, based on recent discussions
with cryptographers:

* Retaining all TLS and other encrypted traffic is likely tractable. In 15
years, computing breakthroughs -- possibly quantum computing, possibly
breakthroughs in mathematics -- will allow all this retained traffic to b
decrypted. 15 years is not an especially long timescale for state security
apparats.

There are quantum-resistant crypto, but getting everything switched over to
it is a heroic challenge.

* Targeting all traffic from people who know how to use Tor/Tails
(http://boingboing.net/2014/07/03/if-you-read-boing-boing-the-n.html) is
already underway. By capturing all the cleartext messages around the
encrypted traffic, most of that traffic's content can be inferred..

For example, Jonl emails me in the clear and says, "I have a leaker who
wants to talk to a journalist about secret drone murders." I send encrypted
email to a lawyer and Bart Gellman. Then I arrange an encrypted chat with
Jonl over Cryptocat to discuss how he can talk to Bart and the lawyer. They
talk over encrypted links for a while, then Bart publishes something about
drones in the Washington Post. You don't have to have access to the emails I
sent to the lawyer and Bart, or the encrypted chat, to infer all the things
that were contained therein.
  
## 120 of 198: awkward hybrid (satyr) Sun 11 Jan 15 22:40

    
It seems to me that one effect of all this running from and
denying change is that it has eroded our ability to take on
challenges composed of more than a few difficult elements.

Jon, you may recall my rants in the Whole Earth conference
regarding the application of robotics to agriculture and
landscape management, a theme I've since taken off-Well to 
<http://cultibotics.blogspot.com>, and elsewhere.

After years of trying to sell this idea, I've come to believe
that what I'm asking for is something akin to the decision to
go to the moon, in that it is both clearly possible and
dependent upon technologies that do not yet exist, requiring
concerted effort over a matter of years to achieve.

But I look around and don't see many examples of such goal-
driven concerted effort happening, at least not government
led, publicly funded efforts.  We seem to have developed a
collective form of myopia, in inability to take on more than
incremental challenges.

Incrementalism is well and good, but aren't we missing
opportunities that can't be reached through incremental
change alone?
  
## 121 of 198: Dodge (dodge1234) Mon 12 Jan 15 00:32

    
It does seem to take a long time to get these advances in actual
use. Hah. I was promised a robot maid by now. Wherezit? Altho I can
clean my floors n cut my grass with one. I even saw a robot BBQ
grill cleaner. Toss the little thing on after you're done cooking
and it travels over the grill cleaning till you come back n take it
off. Despite the scary tales of domestics gone wrong...
  
## 122 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 15 02:43

    
*In 2015 I've been really enjoying the adventures of Samantha
Cristoforetti, first Italian woman living in outer space.  I follow
her on Twitter, FlickR, even Google+ on occasion.

http://samanthacristoforetti.esa.int

@AstroSamantha is the most down-to-earth orbiting astronaut I've
ever seen.  She really has a deft, revelatory, social media
presence.  Her lively attention to the minutiae of daily life in
orbit is so refreshing.  You can practically *smell* the
International Space Station while she's up there.
  
## 123 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 15 03:23

    
*Another woman whose work I'll be following closely is American
pundit and sometime politician, Sarah Palin.  Sarah's kind of busy
with the new sports-TV series bow; otherwise, I'd gladly vacate my
futurist cyberpunk-chairman seat to have her sit in.

*Sarah's got excellent instincts for what troubles her base and what
kind of red meat they desire.  Political charisma of this kind can't
be learned.  Most Red-State operatives are sitting around wasting
the funding of moguls while trying to gerrymander electoral
districts.  Not Sarah.  She's a natural barometer of Red State
sentiment.

*I've never met Sarah, but if she ever wanted to tell me something,
I'm pretty sure it would be a remark that would really get to me on
an immediate, visceral level.  Maybe she'd explain to me why
"fracking" is necessary to strengthen the Church and the Family. 
Just: an insight that, if I accepted it, would cause my paradigm to
explode.

*People on the Left like to praise themselves on "inclusiveness,"
but they would never, ever, include Sarah Palin in anything.  Never.
If she wanted to give them a blood transfusion, or tow their Volvo
out of a ditch with her Alaskan 4X4, they really just wouldn't have
it.  

*An icon of the transgressive is always interesting.
  
## 124 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 15 03:26

    
Here is Sarah last week, leveling with the "People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals."  It's in social media, and it's all about
dogs, but social media loves dogs.  Sarah gets that. She doesn't
even have to think about it.


Sarah Palin added 9 new photos.
January 3 at 1:55pm ·

Dear PETA,


Chill. At least Trig didn’t eat the dog.

Hey, by the way, remember your “Woman of the Year”, Ellen DeGeneres?
Did you get all wee-wee’d up when she posted this sweet picture?
http://conservatives4palin.com/…/peta-woman-year-posts-phot…;
Hypocritical, much?

Did you go as crazy when your heroic Man-of-Your-Lifetime, Barack
Obama, revealed he actually enjoyed eating dead dog meat?

Aren’t you the double-standard radicals always opposing Alaska’s
Iditarod – the Last Great Race honoring dogs who are born to run in
wide open spaces, while some of your pets “thrive” in a concrete
jungle where they’re allowed outdoors to breathe and pee maybe once
a day? (http://iditarod.com/ http://www.irondog.org/)

Aren’t you the same herd that opposes our commercial fishing jobs,
claiming I encourage slaying and consuming wild, organic healthy
protein sources called “fish”? (I do.)

Aren’t you the same anti-beef screamers blogging hate from your
comfy leather office chairs, wrapped in your fashionable leather
belts above your kickin’ new leather pumps you bought because your
celebrity idols (who sport fur and crocodile purses) grinned in a
tabloid wearing the exact same Louboutins exiting sleek cowhide
covered limo seats on their way to some liberal fundraiser shindig
at some sushi bar that features poor dead smelly roe (that I used to
strip from our Bristol Bay-caught fish, and in a Dillingham cannery
I packed those castoff fish eggs for you while laughing with
co-workers about the suckers paying absurdly high prices to party
with the throw away parts of our wild seafood)? I believe you call
those discarded funky eggs “caviar”.

Yeah, you’re real credible on this, PETA. A shame, because I’ll bet
we agree on what I hope is the true meaning of your mission –
respecting God’s creation and critters.

Our pets, including Trig’s best buddy Jill Hadassah, are loved,
spoiled and cared for more than some people care for their fellow
man whose politics may not mesh with nonsensical liberally failed
ways or don’t fit your flighty standards.

Jill is a precious part of our world. So is Trig.

- Sarah Palin
  
## 125 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 15 04:29

    
<satyr>: "I look around and don't see many examples of such goal-
driven concerted effort happening, at least not government
led, publicly funded efforts."

If by publicly funded,  you mean government funded, this ain't an
era of governemtn-funded experimentation. Otherwise if there's no
clear potential profit, business won't do it. Universities won't do
it. Everybody's reaching for the low-hanging muffins.

As for <dadge1234>'s robot maid, I'd do with a Roomba. <bruces> was
showing me video of Casa Jasmina cleverly captured by a camera
mounted on the resident, very busy, Roomba they'd deployed. Those
are busy little devices, and smart enough in that Kevin Kelly "out
of control" way ("smart" action driven by a few simple rules.)
  
## 126 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 15 04:43

    
"Retaining all TLS and other encrypted traffic is likely tractable.
In 15 years, computing breakthroughs -- possibly quantum computing,
possibly breakthroughs in mathematics -- will allow all this
retained traffic to be decrypted. 15 years is not an especially long
timescale for state security apparats."

I think there's a practical limit on storage, and the question is
whether storing all traffic indefinitely, and decrypting it all at
some point when the technology exists, makes sense. The point of
surveillance, as I understand it, is to gather currently actionable
intelligence. Based on what I've heard from Bill Binney et al, the
NSA looks at patterns to determine what's value and to make
predictions about potential threats.

15 years may not be a long timescale, but there are are
bang-for-buck considerations relative to historical distance and
volume of data.

Decryption and analysis inevitably have cost, cycles, and labor
overhead that will restrict their use, just like any activity can be
restricted by the applicable economies. 

It just doesn't make sense to me that you would store everything, or
even decrypt everything, even what's most current.  What you would
do is look for patterns (as Cory suggest in his example) and zero in
on indications of value in context. You might argue that there's
potential value in long-term retention: better technologies reveal
clues you couldn't see when you first gathered the data. But I think
that's a diminishing return.

This is not my usual realm of expertise, though, and common sense
doesn't always apply.
  
## 127 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 15 04:45

    
More from Stefan Jones via email:

Thanks to Tiffany for the correction and link. Here is another
article from the SF Chronicle:

http://www.sfgate.com/homeandgarden/article/Self-cleaning-house-still-has-glitches-2880104.php

Could there possibly be another self cleaning house? Googling only
turns up Francis Gabe's invention, but I recall a very reluctant
demonstration. 

* * *
RE high tech obsolescence cycle, it deeply dismays me. I buy gadgets
very reluctantly, in part as a protest from knowing -- from regular 
visits to  thrift stores -- that a lot of them end up gathering dust
and effectively useless in a few years. I have a relative who
indulges the kids' gadget fascination, to the point where there's a
box in their house with old iPads and cameras. Not broken, just a
couple of models behind. Me, I buy good-enough used stuff when I
can. I have three or four used digital cameras around the house and
car; my phone is a dowdy thing I bought at Walgreen's for $15. I
still use my first MP3 Sans Disk player.

I don't pretend these personal measures amount to much.

For what it is worth, retailers and manufacturers do seem to be
taking steps to facilitate recycling. Best Buy will take your old
tech-kipple, and there are places that will get your old but working
cell phone to people in need.

On the other, other hand, when I go dumpster diving, I see a hell of
a lot of discarded old TVs, the CRT kind with pounds of lead in
their tubes. Unless we implement garbage policing, something I don't
see Americans, at least, ever accepting, it is far too easy to just
ditch e-waste.

And then again, even the ewaste efficiently removed from American
cities doesn't just disappear in a puff of pine-scent and a flash of
virtuous rainbow light. It ends up in developing countries, in
toxic-steeped teardown yards that Dickens' corpse would spin to
pieces if we called them Dickensian.
  
## 128 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 12 Jan 15 07:08

    
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/12/-sp-charlie-hebdo-attackers-kids-france-radicalised-paris

*Nice profile of the attackers here.  I don't think la belle France
is likely to run out of sans-culotte canaille. 

*It's a historical accident that World War I wasn't started by a
Moslem gunmen.  There was a Moslem guy on the streets of Sarajevo
who was part of the same Black Hand cell as Gavrilo Princip.  They
were high school students.  They didn't look any more or less of a
"security threat" than these characters.
  
## 129 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 12 Jan 15 07:22

    
There's always Goodwill. We've offloaded quite a bit of now or near
obsolete tech into Goodwill locally, but I have no idea whether any
of it is useful. They seem to want whatever they can get.
http://www.goodwillsc.org/donate/computers

Obsolescence is fine in a cradle to cradle cycle. The Buddha says no
product is permanent, no more than anything else. Form is emptiness
etc.

Some humans like to think self is real and permanent, transcending
the cycle of inevitability, therefore our various implements,
appliances, devices should be permanent. The inherent impermanence
of quickly obsolete computers and peripherals teaches us the Truth:
nothing lasts. (As you get older and see whole cities transform,
this becomes clearer.)

Re: the state and permanence of human biological entities: we could
get into the h+ debate:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transhumanism#Debate, and the question
of potential tech-mediated human immortalism
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biological_immortality#Attempts_to_engineer_biological_immortality_in_humans).
  
## 130 of 198: Brady Lea (brady) Mon 12 Jan 15 08:06

    

A couple of tweets:

from @bzor

@TheWELL reading this years sotw and can't help but wonder their thoughts on
black mirror, esp the Christmas Special

from @paulfharrison

This is the cyberpunk utopia of free expression we dreamed of in the '00s.
It's bitter and I'm at a loss as to the next move. @TheWELL


(readers, you can still tweet @ us or email inkwell at well dot com with
comments and questions, thanks for playing along at home.)
  
## 131 of 198: awkward hybrid (satyr) Mon 12 Jan 15 10:04

    
Can BitCoin Save Democracy?

<http://kernelmag.dailydot.com/issue-sections/staff-editorials/11334/bitcoin-online-voting-issues/>

<http://tinyurl.com/kxrydva>
  
## 132 of 198: Ted Newcomb (tcn) Mon 12 Jan 15 10:42

    
<It's like being a Tumblr Social Justice Warrior who meets somebody
from 4Chan.> (post 106)

Bruce, that one really did have me laughing out loud. And it
captures an undercurrent we aren't directly addressing. There are so
many cyber sub-cultures, with every point of view being expressed
that it is rare that anyone comes together on anything. Nor can
they, really. One would think the horrors of climate change would do
it, but it doesn't - and that's about as real as it gets. 

As you point out re: Sarah Palin, we're not listening to the other
sides to gain a perspective or even begin a dialog. And there is a
generational digital-cultural divide as well. 

Just staying at home, here on the Well, there are a lot of us old
time, funky granola, Whole Earth Catalog, Co-Evolution Quarterly
types losing the last of our utopian dreams in the face of  myriad 
dystopian possible futures. I don't think we're bitter, tho I can
understand why @paulfharrison might pick that up. I think we're sad
that all the 60's enthusiasm just never won out and now we're trying
to practically find a way forward for our grandkids. 

And there is a new generation coming up, without any of those values
as a predisposition. And we're still talking about a narrow slice of
Western white bread culture. We haven't gotten to the rest of the
planet and how they are streaming into this new world.

As much as I want to think about the 22nd century, and I like the
intentional focus of that way of thinking ... that all starts with a
lot of 'IF's for me. I don't even want to think about the power of
the 1% by that point. And I guess that's your point. If I don't want
that kind of scenario, then I have to work to engineer another one.
  
## 133 of 198: Stephen Torrence (storrence) Mon 12 Jan 15 22:27

    
<satyr>: "I look around and don't see many examples of such goal-
driven concerted effort happening"

Surprised the Neal Stephenson-inspired Hieroglyph project hasn't
come up here yet:

http://hieroglyph.asu.edu/book/hieroglyph/

<bruces> & <doctorow>: Have y'all seen any positive fallout from
Hieroglyph? Or did it get lost in the sky above the port?
  
## 134 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 15 03:57

    
*I'm not quite sure what "positive fallout" from the Hieroglyph
project would look like.  Unless maybe it was genuine fallout from
some Chinese state-supported super-weapons test.  It seems to me
that the Chinese are the ones who still get it about legitimating a
government with concerted, focussed efforts of mega-engineering.

*I've seen some of those efforts.  The Pudong skyscrapers, the Hong
Kong airport, one of the mega-dams.  If you moved even one of those
giant structures into the continental USA, not-in-my-back-yard
people would scream their heads off.  It's not that science fiction
writers to talk about them (although they do talk less).  It's that
the population's actively hostile to efforts of that scale.

*On the other hand, the USA casually dropped a trillion dollars on
an Afghan democratic utopia that never happened.  I don't hear much
complaining about that.  It's not that Americans can't do big stuff,
we just ignore the results when they don't please us.
  
## 135 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 13 Jan 15 03:58

    
Today is Serbia's New Years Day on the Orthodox calendar.  I've got
to run a lot of party errands.  More tomorrow, if I'm not too hung
over *8-/
  
## 136 of 198: david gault (dgault) Tue 13 Jan 15 06:33

    

thanks for the Sarah Palin quote, and Happy New Year!
  
## 137 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 13 Jan 15 06:46

    
I haven't read the Hieroglyph stories, but I admire the concept for
its permission to think utopian. We've certainly done dystopian
thinking long enough to be weary (and wary) of it. 

Dystopian thinking, like bad news and conflict in general, excites
people, and is therefore marketable. So it has traction. Utopia is
boring.

Given that, it's unusual to see a project dedicated to utopian
optimism, as we ponder the flawed and potentially apocalyptic
aspects of 21st century human endeavor. How are we going to fix
pervasive economic injustice, catastrophic climate change, rampant
sexism (manifest by white guys holding forth etc.), media
conglomeration, network interference, terrorism, etc.?
  
## 138 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Tue 13 Jan 15 09:55

    
The EU is a prominent exception to the kneecapping of government...

Horizon 2020: The EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation
http://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/
  
## 139 of 198: Gail (in lieu of disclaimer see gailwilliams.com) (gail) Tue 13 Jan 15 11:35

    
Thanks for the pointer to Hieroglyph http://hieroglyph.asu.edu/

Storytelling, a game, conversation/community project aspects.  
An anthology (including pieces Bruce & Cory & Brenda Cooper and a
bunch of other familiar and new (to me anyway) voices, too. I'll be
checking that out, while I murder the planet with electric lights. 

Pretty nice project.  And out of Arizona. You never can tell where
ideas will sprout.
  
## 140 of 198: Jeff Kramer (jeffk) Tue 13 Jan 15 20:01

    
I put on a big data hat a few months ago, after wearing a cloud hat for a
few years, and I can tell you that the prospect of storing all the TLS
traffic and cracking it later and then running through it looking for
patterns is exactly the kind of thing these deep nerds would be great at.
We're already building great open source toolsets to enable just that kind
of mining, and it keeps getting cheaper.  GPUs make it really efficient to
parse video streams for object detection, it doesn't even take 100% of the
chip today, much less next years tech.

On a more positive note, I wonder if 2015 is the year procedurally generated
content breaks out of the tech art space and into the mainstream.  The game
developers:

http://itch.io/jam/procjam

And 'writers':

https://github.com/dariusk/NaNoGenMo-2014/issues

Have been going at it like crazy lately.  Eventually one of these things
will get internet popular.

I had a thought today about the dispersion of attention and the rise of
computed content.  My wife and I communicate in short hand through quotes.
TV show quotes, movies we both know, general cultural ephemera.  My friends,
who largely belong to the same geek tribe, do the same.  But what happens
when I can put all my interests into a TV show generator or book generator
or game generator and have content that's customized just for me?  There
must be a continuum from "NBC Must See TV" to "Raised in Finland without
Television or Internet", but what happens when everyone's on the Finnish
side of it?  Are we naturally attracted to shared experiences like Game of
Thrones and Walking Dead not because they're just great shows, but because
it gives us something to talk about?

My daughter's 3, and is addicted to YouTube videos of people opening plastic
surprise eggs and playing with toys.  She'll watch them for hours.  Right
now it's in the creators and YouTube's best interest to promote the best of
them, since that's more ad revenue, and a legitimate business.  But what if
you had a machine to generate endorphine optimized surprize toy opening
videos?  What if the key to that is to just let the machine watch YouTube
Videos:

http://rt.com/news/219687-robot-learns-watching-video/

Right now, as a parent I can relate to other parents who are sick to death
of CookieSwirlC videos or that guy on the Engineering Family channel, and
when the kids get together they can talk about their favorites.  But what if
they're all different, made just for us, feedback-loop-optimized for maximum
viewing and stickiness?  Maybe then we just all sit around staring at our
phones.  Not that we don't do that anyway...
  
## 141 of 198: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Tue 13 Jan 15 20:23

    
Yeah we're pretty much there already. The current version is called "music".
  
## 142 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 01:08

    
The "Hieroglyph" project isn't about utopias, it's more about
creating memes or icons that center around very large, but feasible,
think-big construction projects.  The idea is that if fantasists
could make the megaproject seem exciting and glamorous again, people
might put aside their petty divisions and do something.

*It's worth a try, but it kind of elides the likelihood that all
that energy and money would be swiftly siphoned into the pockets of
the eighty super-moguls who own half the wealth on the planet.
  
## 143 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 01:11

    
*I should point out here, that, far from despairing about the
prospects of sci-fi, I am editing the yearly science-fiction issue
of TECHNOLOGY REVIEW *again* now.   The 2014 issue's still around,
and the planet's feverish masses of the relentlessly oppressed seem
to be enjoying it.
  
## 144 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 01:23

    
*I don't write big, tub-thumping novels with the eagerness I used
to, but I'm writing rather a lot of short science fiction lately. 
I'm not sure what this stuff is supposed to demonstrate to anybody
-- it doesn't really "advance the cause," or anything --  but it's
all exceptionally topical and rather politically pointed.  I've done
so many pieces of this ilk now that it's starting to look like some
kind of web-fiction mini-genre.

http://www.iftf.org/fanfutures/sterling/

http://www.dissidentblog.org/en/articles/nexiste-pas

http://motherboard.vice.com/read/the-brain-dump
  
## 145 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 01:57

    
On Stefan's self-cleaning house front, the first device we bought
for "Casa Jasmina" was an iRobot Roomba.  It's not open-source, it's
not particularly new or advanced device.  It's surprisingly delicate
and tender for a dirt-sucking machine.  Its maneuvering system is so
algorithmically wonky that it wanders the floors like a drunken
sailor.  It tends to chew carpet fringes.  The battery life is
short.

Despite these design drawbacks, the robot really and seriously
cleans the floor.  It doesn't exactly do a "good" job, but it does a
job that no human being would do.  Especially its penchant for the
"three D's," the dull, dirty and dangerous.  It crawls under beds
and bookcases, it mechanically obsesses with walls, corners,
crannies, closets, the nameless junkspaces that people don't
valorize or notice, and therefore don't clean very well.  You can
try hand-vacuuming, and then fire up the Roomba, and it returns to
its dock full of household dirt a human eye overlooks.

A Roomba costs rather a lot, for a vacuum cleaner.  I don't know how
much it "costs" to breathe large volumes of pollen, urban grime and
shed pet-hair, every day  Probably rather a lot more.
  
## 146 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 14 Jan 15 02:01

    
Speaking of the relentlessly oppressed, I ran across a good metaphor
for their plight a couple of days ago. Marsha and I were watching an
episode of the political melodrama "Madame Secretary," in which Tea
Leoni plays a former CIA analyst appointed Secretary of State, who
each week juggles various family dramas with always-complex global
political affairs. She's alternately perplexed and powerful.
Hilarity ensues.

In this week's show an older Indonesian woman was found imprisoned
in the home of the Bahrainian ambassador and his wife, apparently as
a housekeeper. They had confiscated her passport and made sure she
couldn't go anywhere. The police break into the residence (I forget
what brought them there) and find the woman blissfully watching
television, living in some closet in the house. They free her, and
at that point the ambassador and his wife arrive home, take one look
at the scene, and declare diplomatic immunity. Madame Secretary,
horrified at the thought that someone was keeping a slave imprisoned
in DC, wants to waive immunity and prosecute the ambassador. The
balance of the episode wrestles with the political issues this
entails - I won't get into the gory details (you'll tl;dr if I do).

But what I found interesting was the Indonesian woman's reaction to
all this. She doesn't seem to feel "rescued." She had work and a
situation that made sense, and now she's cast adrift. Ultimately the
Bahrainians offer reparations - she can have an apartment and her
freedom in the U.S. This doesn't light her fire at all. Offered the
option of returning to Indonesia, she says "there's no work there."
She can't imagine who she would work for in the U.S.  She does have
an offer or work in Bahrain, so she chooses to go there.

I thought this character was a good metaphor for much of the world's
population. They're not thinking about politics or oppression,
they're wondering how to be secure, working, with full bellies and a
roof over their heads. I.e. they're at the lower end of Maslow's
pyramid; they can't even imagine those higher levels.

The Bodhisattva has some work to do, for sure.
  
## 147 of 198: Jeff Kramer (jeffk) Wed 14 Jan 15 07:50

    
I wonder if any of the universal living wage proposals will get traction
globally this year.  It'll be interesting to see what comes out of a net-
connected population where the bottom 80% aren't worried about losing the
roof over their head or their health.  It seems like the global economy's
taking a beating, though, so those kumbaya dreams may have to wait.
  
## 148 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 14 Jan 15 08:55

    
Occasionally you'll run into a piece of writing that articulates and
focuses what your life's about. Kathy Mitchell, my colleague at
Consumers Union, just forwarded a piece like that, an article in
Harvard Business Review called "Understanding 'New Power'." 

"Old power works like a currency. It is held by few. Once gained, it
is jealously guarded, and the powerful have a substantial store of
it to spend. It is closed, inaccessible, and leader-driven. It
downloads, and it captures.

"New power operates differently, like a current. It is made by many.
It is open, participatory, and peer-driven. It uploads, and it
distributes. Like water or electricity, it’s most forceful when it
surges. The goal with new power is not to hoard it but to channel
it."

https://hbr.org/2014/12/understanding-new-power

This helps me understand how to explain the evolution and direction
of my own life over the last couple of decades. I'm totally drawn
into the "current" they describe. 

Aside from projects like this conversation on the WELL, I work
full-time and Consumers Union, and I'm also fully committed as a
member of a web development co-op, Polycot Associates, that used to
be "my company." I'm also president of EFF-Austin, a non-profit that
depends on a working board (we don't have revenues.) And I do a
bunch of other stuff I can't get into here. Suffice to say that I
could never live the life I'm living if I was part of the "old
power" model. Not only would I be miserable, but it just wouldn't
work.

Another point: Tiffany Lee Brown posted earlier a soft criticism of
this conversation as three white males holding forth as experts, but
that's "old power" thinking. I was troubled by her post, but until
now I was less clear how to articulate a response. Neither Bruce nor
Cory nor I are "experts" in the traditional sense. We're all heavy
networked, working within collaborative open systems, constantly
informed and revised by our friends, colleagues, and sometimes by
total strangers who run across our rants and ramblings. And this
conversation is always open to generally unfiltered participation by
others - that doesn't fit the old power concept of "white guys
holding forth."

From the HBR article:

"New power norms place a special emphasis on collaboration, and not
just as a way to get things done or as part of a mandated
'consultation process.' New power models, at their best, reinforce
the human instinct to cooperate (rather than compete) by rewarding
those who share their own ideas, spread those of others, or build on
existing ideas to make them better. Sharing-economy models, for
example, are driven by the accumulated verdict of the community."

I should add this quote, which confirms their roots in reality vs
utopian thinking:

"New power is also fundamentally changing the way everyday people
see themselves in relation to institutions, authority, and one
another. These new norms aren’t necessarily better. For instance,
new power offers real opportunities to enfranchise and empower, but
there’s a fine line between democratizing participation and a mob
mentality. This is especially the case for self-organized networks
that lack formal protections. New power can easily veer in the
direction of a Tea Party or an Occupy Wall Street. (We assume that
most people think at least one of these is a bad thing.)"

And this toward the end of the article:

"As we revel in moments of promise and see ever more people shaping
their destinies and lives, the big question is whether new power can
genuinely serve the common good and confront society’s most
intractable problems. Strategy and tactics are important, but the
ultimate questions are ethical. 'For all of its democratizing power,
the Internet, in its current form, has simply replaced the old boss
with a new boss,' warns Fred Wilson, a partner at Union Square
Ventures. 'And these new bosses have market power that, in time,
will be vastly larger than that of the old boss.'"
  
## 149 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Wed 14 Jan 15 09:31

    
For those who (like myself) were unaware and need an overview,
here's a link to the Wikipedia article on Project Hieroglyph:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Hieroglyph
  
## 150 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Wed 14 Jan 15 10:01

    
<bruces> in <134> "It seems to me that the Chinese are the ones 
who still get it about legitimating a government with concerted,
focussed efforts of mega-engineering."

To add further substance to that point, here's two recent articles
on Chinese megaprojects:

108 Chinese Infrastructure Projects That Are Reshaping The World
http://www.businessinsider.com/108-giant-chinese-infrastructure-projects-that-are-reshaping-the-world-2011-12?op=1

In China, Projects to Make Great Wall Feel Small
http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/13/business/international/in-china-projects-to-make-great-wall-feel-small-.html?_r=0
  
## 151 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 10:19

    
*I'm not sure that the "new power" in "Understanding New Power" is
actually "power" at all, if power is defined as the ability to get
something done that you actually want to do.

*The chart in that article's bothersome.  I kind of dig Wikipedia,
Patagonia, Occupy, Kickstarter and Etsy, but if you put 'em all
together they couldn't run a dog pound.

*I know I'm becoming a gray eminence cracker-barrel philosopher here
in my later years, but it's not like one actually pursues that job. 
It's more like what happens to writers if you have the good grace
not to die.   If it comes to influencing people by changing their
world views, I'm pretty sure that DEAD writers are more powerful
writers than living ones.  Real power-struggles over writers are all
about who gets into the canon and who gets taught in the schools.
  
## 152 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 14 Jan 15 10:26

    
*If you want to see a sci-fi writer who put down the ol' keyboard
and actually got some "power," check this guy out.  Fedor Berezin,
former paperback novelist and current Defense Minister of the
People's Republic of Donetsk, if rebel Donetsk is still calling
itself this week, and if Fedor is still alive.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/sets/72157646170611889/

*I wanted Fedor to write some sci-fi for me, and I struggled hard to
pull it off, but I couldn't get it to work.  I heard from him a
couple of times, but he's under intenrnational sanctions and seems
to be a hard guy to reach.  I look at Fedor's grisly situation from
here in the perspective of Belgrade, and I don't know whether to
laugh or cry.  That's a pretty common everyday response here in
Belgrade, actually.

*I show up here at the WELL SoTW every year, and never once have I
taken it over in an armed putsch.  Not yet, anyway.  I hope
everybody's appreciative.
  
## 153 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 14 Jan 15 10:28

    
ditto
  
## 154 of 198: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 14 Jan 15 10:30

    
aagrh, my ditto was in response to bruce's #151
am noi acuqainted with fedor
  
## 155 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Wed 14 Jan 15 12:53

    
I thought you were dittoing the armed takeover thing. I'm having a
vision of you and <bruces> in camouflage, storming the server,
wherever that might live these days. Fond memories of the old bunker
at Gate 5 Road...

 
  
## 156 of 198: Jeff Kramer (jeffk) Wed 14 Jan 15 15:26

    
From a somewhat more practical perspective, it looks like 2015 will be the
year our air conditioning vents get smart:

https://www.ecoventsystems.com/

http://www.keenhome.io/

It sounds like Keen Home is even partnering with shapeways, so you could,
say, 3d print a one-off personalized vent cover for every room.  Eyeballing
the Keen one, it looks like the battery is usb-rechargable, which is pretty
clever.
  
## 157 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Wed 14 Jan 15 16:31

    
More via email from Stefan Jones:

Jon's analysis of that Madame Secretary reminds me of this Talking
Heads Song:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t9a1JQi7G3k

To Love, add A Job.

* * *

Man. Roombas.

On one hand, I'm not an early adopter. I spend my days with my arm
metaphorically up to its elbow stuck up in horribly complex
video-on-demand server systems, but I'm not liable to rush out to
Fry's for the latest gadget.

On the other, my house has expanses of carpet liable to be covered
with fur and grit a good part of the year.

On the other, other hand, the source of that fur and grit is a
Belgian sheepdog with a high prey drive. I'm not sure what she'd
make of this thing bumbling around the place.

And then there's the carpeted stairs. Keeping them clean is the
hardest vacuuming chore. But the thought of a Roomba with legs is
both cute and kind of terrifying.
  
## 158 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Wed 14 Jan 15 23:15

    
For me, fiction is what tells us how we should expect other people to behave
in times of conflict. Fiction that depicts a world where, when the lights go
out, your neighbors come over to kill and eat you, create a world where,
when the lights go out, you arm up and shoot your neighbor at first sight.

This is masterfully documented in Solnit's PARADISE BUILT IN HELL, with its
application of the idea of "elite panic" to the murderous pre-emptive
strikes of rich, white people in NOLA during Katrina, the creation of an ad-
hoc prison camp by FEMA, the unchecked violence from Blackwater mercs on-
site, and the one-sided, lying narrative from CNN and other press outlets
about the (fictional) looting, Superdome rapes, etc.

Fiction that tells you the story of your neighbors coming to your rescue in
times of extremis means that when you heard the sirens, you reach for a
covered dish, not a shotgun.

A utopia isn't a story about people who don't have problems (because those
people live in a dynamic world -- whatever they're doing to avoid problems
will need to change when the outside world changes). It's a story about
people who are good when they are afflicted by problems.
  
## 159 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 15 Jan 15 01:03

    
*Well, Cory, Lugansk and Donetsk are both big, grown-up cities, and
when they reached for the guns instead of the casserole dishes, they
didn't grab any of those sissy, survivor-type, zombie-killing
handguns beloved in Hollywood flicks.  No.  Ukrainian sci-fi nerds
and motorcycle hoods and car-wash attendants threw on a bunch of
random camou garb, and they rushed out and they grabbed
surface-to-air missile systems, rocket batteries, mortars and
colossal Cold War ex-USSR artillery with muzzles big enough to stuff
a cow in.

*Here in the Balkan Wars, people actually went out and cut the
throats of the neighbors.  Because, you know: neighbors.  In Fedor
Berezin's  civil war in "NovoRussia", it was about lurking in
basements with walkie-talkies, and trying to trick to other guy into
walking into staked-out artillery grids.   Ukraine's a big country
with some big, hefty, military explosions.  Even Malaysian airliners
peaceably cruising way overhead aren't safe.

*This is my Belgrade black humor talking.  I'm never gonna
assimilate in Belgrade society, but I've been around long enough
that I understand why awful stuff is funny.  This is, like, a
contemporary poster of a Belgrade theatrical comedy.  I totally get
it about this attitude now.  It's chucklesome.

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/15658448984/
  
## 160 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 15 Jan 15 02:11

    
*I agree with Jeff that the idea of 3DPrinting, or just digitally
fabricating, bespoke stuff for homes is an interesting prospect.   
There are all kinds of Rem Koolhaas "junkspace" nooks and crannies
in homes where you can't place anything useful because it's not
built to standard measurements. 

*For instance, the plumbing under the sink is full of odd knobs,
elbows and leaky joints.  It solves a manufacturing problem, of
keeping standard pipe and parts in stock, but it doesn't solve the
hydrodynamic problem of getting water out of the local sink and into
the local sewer with an efficient flow.  I can imagine a situation
where you take a simple snapshot under your sink, and some big-math
cloud like Wolfram Alpha figures that out in a jiffy, then generates
a printable shape to contain running water.  

*Bespoke printed plumbing sounds kind of far-fetched, but if you
lived in a house with sinks that never clogged or smelled, you would
certainly notice a sink that was cloggy and smelly.  The old way
would seem archaic and offensive, even possibly dangerous to health.
  
## 161 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 15 Jan 15 02:12

    

*On Stefan's subject of Roombas, dogs and stairs, I'd be very
pro-Roomba in that situation.  Not because I'm keen to do the IRobot
outfit a favor, but because people with pet allergies really swear
by Roombas.  Owners of big hairy pets seem to be the gizmo's
number-one and most loyal clientele.

*There are a variety of Roombas, and Roomba clones and knock-offs
now.  Some are much better with shag carpets than others.  The most
famous Roomba competitor to appear lately is the new Dyson robot
vacuum that runs around photographing the house and navigating with 
robot vision.  Naturally the post-Snowdenites consider it a
potential surveillance device.

*None of these gizmos will ever fall down the stairs.  They figured
that out ages ago.  They scrupulously avoid stairs, so you'll have
to clean the stairs yourself.   Dogs get used to them quickly. 
There are entire video archives of cats casually riding around on
household Roombas. 

*I myself got used to the Roomba -- I literally don't notice it. 
Whenever it bumps into my ankles I just absently shove it aside.

*A Roomba is lightweight and delicate and needs a lot of maintenance
-- mechanically, it's more like a model airplane than a mop.  Oddly,
the best way to clean it is to vacuum it.  It's pretty simple to
empty it, disassemble it and clean all the necessary parts, though
it takes a while and is messy.  If it is not maintained, it will jam
on snarls of hair and fiber that wrap its rotor-brush.

*The Roomba series is the oldest commercially successful domestic
robot, and some Roomba boss once made the interesting comment that a
high-tech, impressive "robot that vacuums" will fail, but a "vacuum
that robots" can be sold through standard vacuum-cleaner channels. 
It will therefore will actually show up inside real-world people's
homes.

*I'm thinking that home automation will likely evolve in that
direction in this decade.  We'll never have a humanoid Rosie the
Robot that operates the household tools created for humans. 
Instead, we'll see household tools with some limited robotic apps
grafted onto them, and they'll be run by wireless broadband.  
Wherever motors already exist in the household, they'll become
motors with connectivity, sensors and actuators.  

*I think all the major players have that figured out now.  They know
that the "Internet of Things" isn't about the "Internet" or
"Things".  What they really want from the "IoT" is a new "CCCP,"
some big, general, epic "cybernetic consortium for the control of
property." 

*Persuading consumers to buy into that prospect really isn't the
main issue.  It more about stealthily installing new capacities
everywhere in the value chain, and then seeing who gets disrupted,
who cashes in, who grabs power and who can make themselves
irreplaceable.  It's the competitive logic of  Amazon, Facebook,
Google, Apple and Microsoft being exported into everything around
us.
  
## 162 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 15 Jan 15 04:33

    
Then there's hacking Roombas for play:
http://news.cnet.com/Roomba-takes-Frogger-to-the-asphalt-jungle/2100-1043_3-6049922.html

For every embedded robot, there's a Fried or Torrone IoT/maker sort
of hacker considering the possibilities. In fact, the hacker joy of
the future may shift from breaking into systems, to repurposing
workerbots. You'll have to put your Roomba on a leash.

Interesting that the Roomba Frogger hack was 8 years ago. I'm sure
we're farther down this path than we realize, and surprising IoT
hasn't arrived in a bigger way as a commercial technology. I'm
hearing that inventor entrepreneurs with IoT strategies are having
to move to Silicon Valley, because they can't get funding elsewhere
... whereas Silicon Valley likes to fund ahead of the perceived
curve.

IoT is definitely on the VC radar:
http://venturebeat.com/2015/01/14/the-thing-that-will-make-or-break-the-internet-of-things-isnt-a-thing/

And it's got a caucus:
http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2015/01/internet-of-things-theres-now-a-us-congressional-committee-for-that/
  
## 163 of 198: Dean Loomis (jonl) Thu 15 Jan 15 06:33

    
Sent yesterday via email from Dean Loomis:

Today's incident with what was apparently a false alarm about
ammonia fumes in the ISS causing Houston to order evacuation from
part of the ISS prompts me to ask a more classic SF-related
question, whether manned missions by SpaceX, Orbital Sciences et al.
can escape NASA's helicopter-mom syndrome.   Is a base on the moon
far enough away to allow astronauts to manage their own lives
without minute-by-minute micromanagement from the earth?

p.s. my house is not Roomba-compatible.  I had one for awhile and
got rid of it because it was too tall to be able to reach under the
1960-era toe kick gaps beneath the kitchen cabinets, and it kept
getting snagged on the ethernet cables running along the baseboards.
  
## 164 of 198: Jeff Kramer (jeffk) Thu 15 Jan 15 07:22

    
In other news, billionaire rocket scientist and electric car manufacturer
donates 10 million dollars to keep AI from destroying human race:

http://futureoflife.org/misc/AI
  
## 165 of 198: reid harward (reid) Thu 15 Jan 15 10:48

    

I wonder why 3D printing has caught Silicon Valley so flat footed? 
  
## 166 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Thu 15 Jan 15 11:41

    
Having a 3d printer, even an expensive one, doesn't create any more
engineering/design skills than Photoshop creats photography and visual
design skills.

3d printing is SLOW.  Hours and hours slow.  Oh, and you made a
mistake, so you need to wait more hours and hours.   A fast print on
my reprap is ~30 minutes and the printout is no larger than a
quarter.  Printing out a bracket that would hold my iPhone 5s could
easily take 3 or 4 hours.

The things you print aren't very high quality, they're effectively
prototypes for using "real" fabrication technology like injection
molding or casting.  

Over at Techshop they have MakerBot printers but there are caps on how
long you an use one, making 2 hours about the longest you can use the
printer.

Right now I'm working on a 3d model of a switch for an expensive
clothing iron that is no longer manufactured.  It's going to take me
an hour or two to finish the 3d model, then another couple of hours to
print switches and test them in the iron.  They aren't strong enough
for any long-term use, so after I have the model nailed I'll have the
real one made over at Shapeways.

So figure 8 hours of my time, a $1500 printer, and a $50 bill from
Shapeways to replace a switch that cost $20 +shipping a few years ago
when this iron was still manufactured.
  
## 167 of 198: George Mokray (jonl) Thu 15 Jan 15 11:48

    
Via email from our friend George Mokray:

Just found this year's State of the World conversation and have read
only the first page but here are some comments:
The debate between Piketty and Stiglitz is important.  What I've
observed is that there is an internationalization of prime real
estate.  From what I've read, at least one high end neighborhood in
London has been bought up by mostly Russian pluto/kleptocrats who
spend a month a year in their palatial homes.  That kills the
neighborhood.  Here, where I live, I saw a Boston Globe article a
couple of years ago about Chinese pluto/kleptocrats buying up houses
in Newton and Wellesley, again for part-time living and, more
recently, there's one Chinese billionaire buying up Harvard Square
properties left, right, and center.  If Stiglitz is right, this is
worth looking more deeply at.  When I bring it up to my local
development friends, they say there's nothing we can do about it
anyway, the market will solve the problem, and we need more
affordable housing so let's concentrate on that.  Hmmm.

Another thing about the built environment I don't see being looked
at is the gathering trend of zero net energy, zero net emissions,
zero carbon buildings that is going on.  Both the EU and California
will be phasing in zero net energy building codes starting in 2017. 
The technology is available now to build anything from skyscrapers
to affordable single family homes as zero net energy.  They produce
all the energy they need onsite and sometimes more than what they
need.  I've seen some examples which produce 3 times what they
consume on an annual basis.  Depending upon whom you ask, buildings
use 30-40% of the energy we presently generate for the grid.  Nobody
I've seen in the energy policy community has yet to address what
happens when we don't need the big power plants we have now to
produce that energy.  What happens when that 30-40% goes away? 
Another interesting question, at least for me.

Lastly, homelessness and empty houses.  The Daily Show a few days
ago reported on the Utah experience of giving housing to the
homeless and reducing their homeless population by about 75% in five
years.  That publicity may give the idea some national traction. 
Some people in LA are trying to do a similar thing in LA but using
Obamacare money because they are addressing the problem as a public
health issue.  There are way more empty houses than there are
homeless in the USA today.  One figure claims 7 times more houses
than homeless.  That's insane on the face of it.  Occupy is still
active in some parts of the country fighting evictions and doing
neighborhood reclamation with sweat equity while reporter Chris
Faraone is doing a series of articles on the militarized evictions
that are occurring in the Pacific Northwest, SWAT teams kicking
people out of their homes.  The contradictions are stark but our
attention is not anywhere near them because a) who cares about
homeless people and b) evictions are so 2009.  Still these realities
are not going away.
  
## 168 of 198: John Payne (satyr) Thu 15 Jan 15 22:10

    
Some of the people responsible for creating the original Roomba design
left iRobot years ago, and went off looking for another market space
that would better support iterative design => market => redesign cycles,
so they could gradually build on the basic idea, tweaking it and adding
functionality incrementally.

They settled on agriculture, and are now known as Harvest Automation...
http://www.harvestai.com
  
## 169 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 15 02:02

    

*Oh my lord, this amazingly comprehensive "threat landscape" of
everything that could possibly go wrong with "internet
infrastructure" would gray the hair of any sane human being.  It's
really scary.  Plus, it's got lots of big, spidery-looking, infoviz
charts.

https://www.enisa.europa.eu/activities/risk-management/evolving-threat-environment/iitl

*However, one of the reasons it's so scary is that somebody's paying
focussed attention.  Imagine if some detail-obsessed security geek
composed the "threat landscape of the internal combustion engine."
He'd never get it done.  He'd have to hire so many threat-assessment
guys that they'd spend all their time in internal bureaucracy.
  
## 170 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 15 03:01

    

*Well, @jet is certainly right about the many practical drawbacks of
contemporary 3DPrinting.  It's never going to work out in the
sweeping, conceptual, handwavey fashion of "wow, print anything you
want."  That's like the old days of Apple desktop laser printers,
when they would sell 'em to gullible authors with the pretext that
you could "publish anything that you want."  I mean, yeah, you can,
sorta, but…

*Hobby 3DPrinting also reminds me of ham radio.  Hobby 3DPrinting
stuff is for a dedicated cadre of patient, tinkery guys who are way
into 3DPrinting per se.  Makers do make some stuff, like Etsy
crafters and light manufacturing, but true-blue Makers really like
to make stuff for makers so they can make stuff to make.  I don't
dismiss that; it's metaphysically endearing, actually.  It's like
writers theorizing about literary theory, so you can improve your
theory theorization theorizing.
  
## 171 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 15 03:02

    

*Here's a prototypical recent example from the circles of David
Cuartielles in Spain; this ingenious couple of Estonian Makers,
Varvara and Mar, uses a 3DPrinter to print a yarn-knitting machine.

http://thecreatorsproject.vice.com/en_au/blog/now-you-can-3d-print-your-own-diy-knitting-machine

*So, okay, why "print" a "knitter."  Why?  Why not just buy a
yarn-knitting machine off the shelf?  Or, with even more economic
rationality, why not just buy a long, formless, functionally
meaningless tube of loosely machine-knitted yarn?  

*But this overlooks the Maker achievement here:  they successfully
installed software-driven patterns into material substances that had
no software-driven patterns.  

*What you REALLY ought to do is fire up that knitter, knit the
fabric tube, and then install a reverse knitter at the end of the
tube that UN-KNITS THE FABRIC at the same speed!    Then you'd have
a nifty conceptual-art project that was all about displaying
software "process."  Then you wouldn't have to worry about selling
anything, or waiting around for it to actually "finish."  You could
open-source it, and then some other fanatic would show up and say
"hey look I can drop stitches and create 8Bit graphics in the yarn
flow!"
  
## 172 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 15 03:03

    

*These cranky paradoxes in tech development don't embarrass me.  I
mean, yeah, I know they're goofy, counterproductive, frustrating,
dangerous, toxic and even frankly evil at times, but it's like
watching 'em make law and sausage.  Everybody warns you not to watch
those two processes in detail, because you'll supposedly lose all
respect for law and all appetite for sausage.  But that's how we
actually get law and sausage.  Are we supposed to pretend that the
stork brings the law, or we find sausage under the cabbages?  Those
are facts of life.

*Whose dewy naiveté are we protecting here?  Yeah, the 3DPrint scene
is a complicated cranky mess that is riddled with hype and illusion,
and the best efforts are often not repaid; the whole shebang may
suddenly vanish some day like unpassed laws or stale sausage.  But
I'm okay with that; yeah, I'm a critic, but I won't turn up my nose
at it because it might dent my ideals.  I will engage with it, as
it, in fact, exists.  I even sympathize.
  
## 173 of 198: reid harward (reid) Fri 16 Jan 15 05:11

    
I love the three-armed Delta repraps that print ceramic paste. 
They're never going to replace making dinner ware the old fashioned
way.  I can't help but think it's only a matter of time before
someone refines something that was otherwise lashed together with
rubber bands, duct tape, and Kinects that will change everything
like some sort of mini maker singularity. I imagine this is where 3d
printing will shine in the short term.  Altergaze has a kickstarted
VR cell phone housing that seems to exploit advances in cell phone
technology to bring VR to the masses.  What I find even more
exciting is they propose a crowd-manufacturing scheme that puts a
thousand idle 3d printers to work making virtual reality rigs.  They
seem to have encapsulated the promise additive manufacturing offers
of inverting manufacturing models. http://www.altergaze.com/

I'm also interested in the idea that, as it is an emergent industry,
it's hard to predict where it will settle culturally.  Sure, I'm
making handles for my widget, but someone else, who has a whole
different set of concerns, might find one useful in fashioning a
prosthesis to replace their leg. 
  
## 174 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Fri 16 Jan 15 07:10

    
Always clever Dave Winer created a "listicle" for the "newclues"
published a few days ago by Doc Searls and David Weinberger. You
know how so many sites create lists that are chunked into a bunch of
slides that you click through? That's a listicle, and I sometimes
find it annoying, but it's probably good for web-addled adhd
comprehension. The listicle is here: http://listicle.io/cluetrain/ 
David Weinberger notes
(http://www.hyperorg.com/blogger/2015/01/14/install-your-own-listicle/) that Dave made it easy for anybody to make one of these things (http://scripting.com/2015/01/13/listicleOListicle.html).

Learning to make these things for yourself is what Doug Rushkoff
might call a "program or be programmed" strategy; Winer talks about
"freedom-building software."
(http://scripting.com/2015/01/12/straightTalk.html)

I like the concept of an IndieWebCamp and want to make one happen
here in Austin. https://indiewebcamp.com/ IndieWebCamp proponents
recognized that the corporations are increasingly taking control of
our web-based activities and turning us into products, sold to
advertisers via various channels developed by the stacks that have
grown, evolved, and prospered via the Internet, which has been
altered by their evolution, from a platform for peer production,
culture jamming, DIY ferment, many-to-many sharing to a more
top-down platform for media, increasingly littered with video
streams, making it more like cable television. Those of us who
evangelized for the Internet early on were also speaking against the
cable-ization of the environment, concerned that it would curb peer
to peer activity, divert it to vacant alleys and side-streets while
the slick, polished corporate content machines were leveraging fast
lanes exclusive to them. The net neutrality argument is about this.

In fact we're somewhere in the middle at this point, and pushing
IndieWeb could help us empower users, at least those who are open to
it, and sustain the Internet described in newclues, "of us, by us,
and for us." I hope I don't sound like one of Austin's neighborhood
activists, decrying the city's transformation by progressive growth.
As a Buddhist I know that nothing is permanent, no form persists.

We can evolve without giving up our freedom, but we have to work for
it, even fight for it. There should be an IndieWeb and there should
be plenty of room for the Internet to be the Internet. I want to
support people in learning to build their own stuff, without
depending on platforms that may give them a way to do cool stuff,
but that exploit their energy and creativity. I have nothing against
Facebook, in fact I'm in there other day, but I don't want that to
be my only option. And if it is, it's my own damn fault. I already
built my own standalone blog and know how to use it... resorting to
Facebook posts via blog posts has been path of least resistance
laziness on my part.

Speaking of 3D printers - I haven't been fascinated by them, just as
the Arduino kit I bought still sits unused because it wasn't a
priority for me. But I really love the fact that people are finding
ways to make their own weirdly interesting stuff. I love that Limor
and Phil transformed a Roomba into a frog. I love that Tantek Celik
and my pal Amber Case are taking time to organize IndieWebCamp,
CyborgCamp, various environments where we can develop our own cranky
DIY expertise and refine it into something real.
  
## 175 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Fri 16 Jan 15 09:45

    
3d printing certainly has a place in design and ideation, but I think
the analogy of "selling laser printers to authors" is also quite true.

The "we can print everything" idea is an interesting concept but it's
not going to happen with oshw printers like the Reprap.  I have two
oshw printers, a MendelMax and a MakerBot, and compring them to
commercial 3d printers is a bit like comparing a go-kart to a 50'
semi.

One of the commercial 3d printers I've used was the size of a
refrigerator and was located next to a lye bath kept at 160F.  The lye
bath is for removing the structure needed to do a complicated 3d
print.  Hands up, who want's a lye bath in their house, or even their
garage?  Oh, and that printer cost over $200,000 and ran on 220VAC
like a stove or clothes dryer.  The largest thing it could print was
around 8" square, so you won't be printing furniture.  It doesn't use
food-safe plastic so no plates or utensils.

There's one area that I think would seriouly benefit from 3d printing
-- jewelry.  Once 3d printers are affordable and safe, say the same as
a sewing machine, artists will be have a new set of tools for making
jewelry and decoration for the body and home.

We're still at the early edge of the curve, but it looks like it will
be an interesting curve: <http://design-milk.com/3d-printed-jewelry/>.
  
## 176 of 198: Ed Ward (captward) Fri 16 Jan 15 09:50

    
I was fascinated to see some real facts about 3-D printing because
of the folks who set up a printer by the Texas Capitol the other day
to print guns. As if, apparently. 
  
## 177 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Fri 16 Jan 15 11:50

    <hidden>
  
## 178 of 198: Stefan Jones (jonl) Fri 16 Jan 15 12:40

    
Via email from Stefan Jones:

Someone mentioned "Black Mirror" uptopic.

Sheeeesh. A show I dread watching, but watch it I must, out of sheer
admiration.

Each episode fills me with a sort of horrified giddiness, and a sort
of affirmation. Someone writing SF for TV finally "gets it!" To
steal a line from @bruces, "Black Mirror" is utterly lacking in
comfortable bullshit. The brave and plucky hero won't win out by
frying the computer's logic circuits with a riddle contest, or
delivering an impassioned speech to open the eyes of the
downtrodden. (In fact, the hero of the second episode does just
that, and gets hired to sell shit.)

I've heard "Black Mirror" compared to The Twilight Zone, but I think
the former's writers are more deeply stewed in actual technology
than Serling's stable of writers. As a result "Black Mirror" is far
more pointed, but likely won't age as well.

* * *

Well, I'm going to look into a Roomba. But it might find a way to
override its stair-avoidance mechanisms when it realizes it is up
against this:

https://www.flickr.com/photos/stefan_e_jones/4799299303/in/set-72157624384568387
  
## 179 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 16 Jan 15 13:38

    
http://mashable.com/2015/01/16/drone-donetsk-airport/

*Nice semi-amateur drone video of the Donetsk airport, utterly
riddled with the local plethora of mortar rounds, Grad batteries,
artillery, etc etc.  The airport was up for grabs in the first days
of the civil war, and pretty much nothing has changed strategically,
except that the locals dropped more and more high explosive on their
own prize possession there.

*One could say much the same about large areas of ISIS-held Iraq. 
Lots of expensive holes blasted in the ground, not a lot of
advancement toward any kind of resolution.  War in general seems to
have taken on a lot of the characteristics of the War on Drugs.  You
blast the drugs, there's more drugs, you blast those drugs, there's
other drugs.  

*2015 isn't pioneering in any of this, but it's showing a lot of
continuity.
  
## 180 of 198: J. Eric Townsend (jet) Fri 16 Jan 15 19:50

    
I hid 177 as it's a rather long description of why one can't just go
"3d print a gun" any more than they can go "3d print a household
appliance".
  
## 181 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Fri 16 Jan 15 23:28

    
Here's a speech I gave this week in Budapest in which I tried to link wealth
disparity, surveillance, corruption, and the Internet of Things:


http://archive.org/download/2015.01.15.Mindenki.Joga.CoryDoctorow.CEU.Budapest/2015.01.15.Mindenki.Joga.Cory_Doctorow.CEU.Budapest.mp3

It's the first time I've tried to connect all these things, and I think it
came out well.

On Tuesday, I'm going to be making a big announcement about the project I'm
about to embark upon for the next two years.
  
## 182 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 17 Jan 15 00:49

    
*It's 2015, and the Saudis are building a giant Israeli-style
high-tech border wall to repel ISIS... or Iraqis, or Shiites, or
whomever.  Well, so much for free-range Islamic Globalization when
everybody just whips over to Mecca whenever they please.

http://www.businessinsider.com/saudi-arabia-is-building-a-600-mile-great-wall-to-shield-from-isis-2015-1
  
## 183 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 17 Jan 15 00:56

    
*The 3DPrinted gun thing is a political stunt, pure and simple, but
when it comes to ultra-libertarian provocations, Cody Wilson is
superb at that.  He's basically the Yes-Men of the Texan gun-crowd.

*Another Austinite I'll be watching with interest in early 2015 is
Ross Ulbricht, who's currently undergoing a show trial because of
this little matter of his gigantic, free-spirited Bitcoin narcotics
market.

*And of course there's Texan underground journalist Barrett Brown. 
People keep pretending they've never heard of him.  He never gets
the Google Juice of Assange or Snowden.  Somehow, Barrett crossed
into the spooky shadowlands one time too many.

*I'm feeling the distinct absence of a sinister female Texan
mastermind in this list.  The gals in Texas need to step up their
game this year.
  
## 184 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 17 Jan 15 01:00

    
*I gotta quit typing and clean house now, because I'm switching
countries.  Looks like my participation in the SOTY 2015 will reach
a predestined end here.

*Looking forward to Cory's big announcement.  Guys who ought to be
writing weird novels actually doing real stuff like blowing up
Donetsk, this is like a big trend for scifi in 2015.  The genre's
maturing, it's finding its role in normal, mundane life!  Pretty
soon we can all start radio-parts catalogues!
  
## 185 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 17 Jan 15 09:02

    
We're theoretically on through Monday, and with <bruces> bowing out,
we can take some time to move the furniture back in place, vacuum
the floors, and do the dishes.

Foreign Policy has a top-ten list of "wars to watch in 2015":
http://foreignpolicy.com/2015/01/02/10-wars-to-watch-in-2015/

tl;dr, but you should at least check out the intro. They offer some
ideas about mitigation, which include more strategic policy, more
dialogue, more inclusion and more prevention - all at international
scale. I suspect the U.S. has less weight in the world, given our
profound internal dysfunction and its impact on our global presence.


I said earlier that Christopher Dickey, Paris correspondent to the
The Daily Beast, seemed to speculate on NPR that the Charlie Hebdo
attack was staged by a couple of jerks acting alone. A later piece
by Dickey
(http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/01/12/why-our-spies-failed-to-save-charlie-hebdo.html) notes a confusion about connections to larger organizations:

"... officials were puzzled, if not stunned, when Chérif Kouachi
told the French BFMTV network over the phone on Friday that his
operation against the offices of Charlie Hebdo magazine was backed
by al Qaeda in Yemen, while his evident accomplice, Amedy Coulibaly,
in a call to the same network and in a video released yesterday,
claimed his allegiance was to the so-called Islamic State and its
self-proclaimed caliph." In fact, Al Qaeda and ISIS are at war with
each other, but Dickey's piece quotes a CIA operative, saying "The
super-bosses may be wrapped up in these ideological fights, but the
followers really are not."

From my perspective, while in a way the Hebdo terrorists were
related to larger organizations, because those organizations are so
decentralized, the connection is more ideological than practical.
Terrorism is spreading infection, a loose way of connecting rogue
mutating viruses that don't need all the source DNA to be toxic.

In all the talk of wars and terrorists, I don't see enough about
accelerating populations, challenged resources, and increasingly
complex demographic mixes and collisions. I suppose an overfed
analyst with a four bedroom house, two kids, and clean water doesn't
know what to make of population overload and resource scarcity. I
know I can't get my head around it.

In the U.S.A. our responses to the shock of global and accelerating
change are varied, but the fact that we're electing so many
reactionary legislators, some of them intellectually challenged,
must mean something. It could mean that, seeing the daunting
complexity of the world around them, the smartest among us have no
desire to run for public office. 

Here's a quote from an interview with poet Gary Snyder (mostly about
bioregionalism) ...

"I talked to an elderly Crow Indian up in Montana a few years ago
who said just that. He was an interesting man, I guess regarded as a
medicine man, and we were at a meeting where there were a lot of
younger Indian radicals and activists. This older man said to me,
kind of as an aside, 'You know, I'm not really worried about what
white people are going to do to this continent. If anybody lives
here long enough, the spirits will begin to speak to them. It's the
power of the spirits coming up from the land,' he said. 'That's what
taught us, and it would teach everybody, if they'd just stay here.
The old spirits and the old powers they aren't lost; they just need
people to be around long enough to begin to influence them.'

"Now that may be overly optimistic, but it's an elegant perspective.
To some extent, you can see it working. If people will just be in a
place long enough and will begin to actually say 'OK, I'm here,'
then they'll begin to learn."
  
## 186 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sat 17 Jan 15 16:11

    
So the world of humans is going a little nuts, but the earth may
find us again.
  
## 187 of 198: Truffle hunter (oink) Sat 17 Jan 15 17:03

    
I like that notion <jonl> 
  
## 188 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Sat 17 Jan 15 23:21

    
One other salient fact about a 3D printed knitting machine: knitting is,
itself, a form of 3D printing. So it's also a 3D printed 3D printer.

About sf writers Doing Stuff in the world. -- I have always felt that
telling stories about how technology can make you feel (for good or bad) is
an intrinsically political act. It's a way of colonizing the future, because
when it arrives, we parse it thorugh the sf narratives we've absorbed on the
way.

It's not that huge a leap from there to direct activism.

This project started gestating about a year ago, when the W3C green-lit
putting DRM in HTML5. I saw that as the beginning of the end for a world in
which it was legal to tell you if your computer is doing something bad to
you, whether on behalf of cops, spies, or crooks (skids, RATters, identity
thieves, etc).

So the project I'm announcing on Tuesday is an effort to reform the  legal,
commercial, technical and normative framework through which we understand
and interact with technology, all over the world, in order to ensure that
the very idea of a computer thatyou own, but which acts on someone else's
behalf, is a dead letter.
  
## 189 of 198: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 18 Jan 15 01:30

    
*I managed to clean the house.  Currently awaiting a flight to
Milan.  Snagged some semi-licit wifi.  It's pretty hectic, like the
Housing Crisis in fractal miniature.  I'm guessing the rest of 2015
will be Augean Stables for me and mine.

*I'm quite proud to participate in these State of The World events. 
It's great that the WELL is three decades old.  First in, last out
-- it's like a symposium in a neoclassic library built during nobler
times.

*Oh, and I got my story about the Roman Empire done.  So we got some
closure there.  I'll have to tighten and brighten the latest draft a
little, so that is hopefully becomes interesting to somebody besides
me.  "Leave out the parts people skip!"  "But I suffered for my
homework, and now it's your turn!"

*Every writer likes to imagine his words echoing down the ages, into
the vasty halls of Futurity, yea, even unto the much-awaited 22nd
Century.  But I bet anything that if you hauled some Roman literary
bigwig into the present day and confronted him with the wreckage of
his writings, he'd be horrified.    "The freakin' Aeneid survived? 
But I couldn't even be bothered to finish the Aeneid!  I wanted the
manuscript burned!"

*Ave atque vale. 
  
## 190 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Sun 18 Jan 15 07:40

    
Liz Fisher and Robert Matney of Whirligig Productions here in Austin
are just wrapping up the successful run of Liz's interactive play
"Deus Ex Machina." Rob pulled together the technology for
interaction - the play has multiple narrative paths, and the
audience members can vote a direction for the narrative via
cellphone at various points, with the votes quickly tallied via the
"machina" and the play proceeding according to the collective whim
of the audience. This being a classic Greek tragedy (transformed
into a classic geek tragedy), I suspect that all paths lead to a
similar bloody end, but I've only see the play once, and there are
twelve different storylines and 12,288 possible variations. If you
want to see the play, they're live streaming a final performance
today at 5pm CT: http://whirligigproductions.com/live/

But you'll just be seeing one of the many possible variations.

(I should mention that the WELL's own <katecat> has a prominent role
in the play, as Clytemnestra.) 

If you don't have time to stream the whole play, you can get a sense
of it from the short video series, "Drunk Oresteia"
http://whirligigproductions.com/drunkoresteia-the-complete-series/ -
hilarious, but without interactive choice.

The state of the (human) world is like this play, many potential
paths forward, the life-narrative depending on collective choices
along the way. And various actors find ways to add weight to the
collective will, to steer the narrative in a direction favorable to
them. Even the most irrational-seeming narrative paths have a
logic,if you can see the full complexity of the decision paths and
all the weights applied.

And there are shocks, as well, from natural disaster to irrational
acts, that can also change the direction of the human narrative.

Scenario-building and future-forecasting look at current trends in
the narrative and predict where the play will go some number of
years out, but without visibility into the potential weights and
shocks. 

It's better to forget about predicting the future, and focus more on
creating the future you want. Create the weights you want, prepare
to adapt to the shocks, steer the most constructive and productive
human course. Politicians are absolutely failing in this regard, and
probably always have.

As Howard Rheingold says, "What it is, is up to us."
  
## 191 of 198: (katecat) Sun 18 Jan 15 12:04

    
oh yes you guys, do stream if yu have a chance. Controlling the action (in
many many small and three ENORMOUS ways) seems to be really fun for the 
audience--lots of shouts and arguments during the voting, and at 
intermission people jockey for more power.

It's been a quite intense and enjoyable experience. During the big audience
decisinos we're all standing backstage glued to the monitors, bucket of
blood in one hand, costume change in another, script at the ready 
also because um we haven't done some of those bits in a couple of weeks..
  
## 192 of 198: Gail Williams (gail) Mon 19 Jan 15 12:15

    
Very cool.  Do you know how many variations audiences have demanded
of you?
  
## 193 of 198: (katecat) Mon 19 Jan 15 16:46

    
we had thirteen performances and only ever did six of the twelve endings, 
I think. Maybe seven. The "endings" were short, two to six pages of 
script. The script branches in two; then each of those two branches 
branches in two; then each of those four branches branches into three 
endings, twelve altogether.

BUT beyond those main votes, where a character goes to the oracle for help 
with a major decision, there are many many smaller votes throughout that 
cause not so much a branch in the stream as a rock that the stream parts 
to flow around and and then joins together again--if that awkward image 
makes  sense. Gods, should we retell this part of our history again? Gods, 
should I walk on this red silk Clytemnestra has laid out for me, which 
I feel is a bad omen? Gods, can I kiss this pretty girl? That kind of 
thing. The producers calculated that there were actually over 12,000 
possible different experiences of the show.

oh AND, if you didn't like the way the last oracle went, you had the 
option to "secede" and leave the theater with zeus to see the ending you 
had voted for (albeit, as it turned out, in a different, lesser form--I 
think in one thread the audience members who left were given scripts so 
that they could act out the endings themselves)
  
## 194 of 198: Gail Williams (gail) Mon 19 Jan 15 17:32

    
Wow, that's nice.  I remember as a kid I went to Expo67, the World's
Fair in Montreal. There was a movie there with plot forks where the
audience voted, and as I heard tell at the time, the audiences were
always choosing the same plot.  (Could have been rumor, and was only
part way through the season, but I thought that was pretty funny at
the time.)

Flowing back together is a wise structure choice.  Cool that you
made this workable! 
  
## 195 of 198: Type A: The only type that counts! (doctorow) Tue 20 Jan 15 09:13

    
Aaaand here's the announcement:

https://www.eff.org/press/releases/cory-doctorow-rejoins-eff-eradicate-drm-everywhere

Basically, I've gone back to EFF to start the resistance in the War on
General Purpose Computers. We're going to use law, code, norms and markets
to eradicate all forms of DRM in a decade. Details will follow. We do this
not because it is easy, but because it is hard.
  
## 196 of 198: Gail Williams (gail) Tue 20 Jan 15 09:55

    
Excellent.  You are needed as an activist, though personally I was
hoping it was another novel being published. 

I hope the quote from the press release gets used.  It's a good one.
Happily reposting here:

"Apollo was a decade-long plan to do something widely viewed as
impossible: go to the moon. Lots of folks think it's impossible to
get rid of DRM. But it needs to be done," said Doctorow. "Unless we
can be sure that our computers do what we tell them, and don't have
sneaky programs designed to take orders from some distant
corporation, we can never trust them. It's the difference between
'Yes, master' and 'I CAN'T LET YOU DO THAT DAVE.'"
  
## 197 of 198: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Tue 20 Jan 15 16:45

    
Didn't want to wrap the conversation until Cory made his
announcement, but we're done here now and I just want to put a bow
on it and ship.

Thanks to Bruce, Cory, and all the other folks who chimed in! 

Like Cory, I have a long history with EFF - even longer, all the way
back to the founding of the org. I'm still involved, as President
(for over a decade) of EFF-Austin, the EFF protochapter that just
kept choogling along after EFF decided not to be chapters
organization. EFF didn't have chapters because that didn't make
sense for a network organization - better to interact with
independent nodes of all shapes, sizes, and philosophies.
Cooperation is more powerful than control. 

If you care about the Internet, and if you care about the network of
people that the Internet has empowered, you should support EFF in
all its activities. Maybe we can build a world where rights are
respected, not "managed."

See you all next year.
  
## 198 of 198: Alan Fletcher (af) Wed 28 Jan 15 09:47

    
Too late to join the discussion as it happened. 

As for the old-white-male-participant domination ... they didn't
start off that way! I would continue this unbroken sequence .. and
ADD a parallel young-color-female version.
  

