# Well State of the World 2023 

Please see the following note: https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/522/State-of-the-World-2023-Bruce-St-page01.html#post15 



## 0 of 332: Inkwell Co-host (jonl) Fri 30 Dec 22 08:14 

We're stumbling into the new year, and it's time for the 23rd annual State of the World conversation. Bruce Sterling and I will be posting our thoughts over the next two weeks, along with our invited guests, members of the WELL, and readers who send comments and questions via email. 

The year is 2023, which brings to mind the 23 enigma <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/23_enigma>. William Burroughs, Robert Anton Wilson, Arthur Koestler, "Principia Discordia" and others consider 23 a significant number, i.e. "lucky, unlucky, sinister, strange, sacred to the goddess Eris, or sacred to the unholy gods of the Cthulhu Mythos." Wikipedia mentions that the 23 engima may be a case of apophenia, "the tendency to perceive meaningful connections between unrelated things." And there's a lot of that going around lately, just ask Q.     


## 1 of 332: Inkwell Co-host (jonl) Fri 30 Dec 22 08:15 

Our invited guests: Toomas Hendrik Ilves, diplomat, journalist, and former President of Estonia. He's co-chair of the World Economic Forum working group The Global Futures Council on Blockchain Technology, a Visiting Fellow at Stanford University, a member of the advisory council of the Alliance for Securing Democracy, and one of the 25 members of the "Real Facebook Oversight Board", an independent monitoring group unaffiliated with, but created in response to, the Oversight Board, Facebook Inc.'s content moderation review board. Toomas will be joining us assuming he's spared from Covid... 

Allucquere Rosanne "Sandy" Stone, an academic theorist, media theorist, author, and performance artist. Sandy ran the University of Texas ACTLab <https://actlab.us/>, and (in various incarnations) she has been a filmmaker, rock 'n roll music engineer, neurologist, social scientist, cultural theorist, and performer. She is the author of numerous publications including "The Empire Strikes Back: A Posttranssexual Manifesto" and "The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Mechanical Age" 

Emily Gertz is a journalist who covers climate, energy and environment from diverse angles including politics, regulation, technology, science, activism, and community impacts. Her stories have appeared in national publications that include HuffPost, Reveal, Sierra, The Revelator, Audubon News, Popular Science, The Guardian, Scientific American and TED Ideas. 

Patrick Lichty is an artist, writer, curator, engineer, futurist. TED 2010 exhibitor, Alpert/CalArts Fellow, activist, VR/AR/MR/media pioneer. He is currently Assistant Professor at Winona State University in Minnesota.     


## 2 of 332: Your Hosts... (jonl) Sun 1 Jan 23 06:52 

Bruce Sterling is an author, journalist, editor, critic in Turin, Austin and Ibiza.  

And I'm Jon Lebkowsky, writer and podcaster, co-wrangler of the Plutopia News Network and co-host at Radio Free Plutopia. <https://plutopia.io>. 

This is our 22nd annual State of the World conversation. We'll be here for two weeks, so keep checking for new posts until we wrap up the conversation on January 16.     


## 3 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 23 02:21 

Well, here we are on the WELL for our traditional, long-established state-of-the-world assessment. I'm mildly surprised at how much cultural continuity this particular decade has to offer.  It's like the year 2020 started, and that year has never stopped since. 

One year ago, I was assessing that "the State of the World is 'diseased.'" That's entirely true of this year, too. Here I am, a year later,  and lo, I'm sick.  It's not Covid this time, because I've got no fever and I can smell fine, but I suspect it's the "syncitial virus" that's overrunning Ibiza. So  I'm not all that badly off, but yes, it is a big public contagion -- an aspect of the "tripledemic." 

Also -- after heroic repression efforts for all of this decade-to-date -- Covid-19 has overwhelmed China.  The Chinese simply lost their epic, dramatic health-war, and then they promptly and stoically clammed up about the shame of it.  Their miserable disease is  just not allowed to become news -- the scandalous reality is sternly Great-Firewalled away. That's the year 02023, though; Covid thrives worldwide, more global than kudzu.     


## 4 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 23 02:25 

To censor Covid in China seems quite nutty and  even self-destructively spiteful of them, but there's also something avant-garde and modern about it.  You can easily imagine a groundswell of denialist-activists wanting to make it illegal to talk about Covid -- just, de-platform the virus wherever you can.  "What's to be done?"  Get used to it and ignore it, that's what! 

There's something very Twenty-Twenties about attempting and failing to "turn the page" on inconvenient truths that can't and don't go away. That's why each year tends to repeat the last.  I wouldn't call that "moral cowardice," because people do not, and cannot, really ignore the pervasive problems -- they do see them, and tend to complain quite consistently about the same issues, year after year.  But, without ever getting much done about them.  It's rare to see any public problem that's analyzed, agreed-upon, confronted, dealt with and dismissed.  All the "crises" tend to thrive, and to mutate into long-term shambolic debacles.  It's a decade that feels the need to marinate in its own distresses -- doomscrolling as a way-of-life. 

"When you can't imagine how things are going to change, things change in ways that are unimaginable."     


## 5 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 23 02:31 

And yet, it doesn't feel like any breakdown is near at hand in 02023.  On the contrary, there's a strange and interesting stolidity to this era, a lack of fervor, and a sense that this might become a long-emergency way of life.  It's bad, but not in the way people previously assumed.   

For instance, consider the act of legalizing gay marriage, marijuana and psychedelics.  Substantial parts, even majoritarian parts, of the US population were absolutely confident that this grotesque mistake would mean utter moral anarchy and complete, perverse, satanic decay.  And, yeah, it sorta does "mean" that -- but it actually doesn't *do* that.  Astonishingly, it seems that people could shovel raw marijuana off dump trucks into gay bars worldwide, and that doesn't seem to make any practical difference. 

 How about if you counterattack by banning abortion?  Okay, that is "culture war," but is the victory sweet?  Where's the successful achievement?  Everything just feels worse.     


## 6 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 23 02:35 

 In 02023, people are becoming poorer, their lifespans are shorter; food costs more, and housing is worse. You'd think there would be more focussed, radical indignation about such an obvious bad scene -- a culture in visible decline -- but the temper of the times seems to welcome it, somehow.  It seems to have the glum peasant resignation that you see under many  historical oligarchies, and yet also a strange proletarian resilience, like "Who cares for your edicts, your so-called highness?  Do your worst, you posh fool!"   

Events are indeed pretty bad, yet it doesn't feel like any collapse is near at hand; there's a mood almost of public penitence, like, "Man, we've got this punishment coming, but it could have been so much worse, considering what we deserved!"  It feels quite like life in "frozen conflict zones." You can get by in there, but you have no legitimate path by which you can accomplish much.  All the ways out have been land-mined. 

I don't like begin a year with gloomy, elaborate whining;  that like a privileged luxury that people have when Mom's not chased in exile and Dad's not under arms in a trench.  And yet,  I do realize that my customary futurist speculative habits have become old-fashioned.  I'm from a tech-obsessed subculture, so it's my habit to look for scientific and industrial innovations and assume they're gonna alter the world's situation.  

That's not what happens in this decade.  I'm aware that I need better methods.     


## 7 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 2 Jan 23 02:38 

The habits of mind of  previous decades  -- they don't align with reality.   

So what *does* align?  Well, the State of the World is a chance to try and figure that out!  Let's have at it!     


## 8 of 332: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 23 16:08 

I like to start the conversation with a kind of top ten list - you might say a list of trends, or conditions, posted here in no particular order. 

1) Medical meltdowns: has Covid changed us forever? People are "doing their research" about public health issues, vs. listening to experts who really know something. Certain people counseled their followers to dismiss expertise, energizing the anti-vaccine movement. Meanwhile we have a new concept: tripledemics, the three-way punch from Covid + flu + RSV. 

2) War and peace: Impact of the war against freedom for Ukraine, rumblings about a possible World War III. Also potential for Civil War in the USA. After years of relative peace and relative quiet, authoritarian chaos agents are poking various bears and creating a new concern about global war and nuclear armaments. Related: Nuclear hope and fear. With a revival of the nuclear threat, we also have the possible promise of nuclear fusion to replace many uses of fossil fuels. But is the promise well-founded? 

3) AI is becoming more visible and usable, and just as misunderstood as ever. A good example is ChatGPT, a conversational AI that bends over backwards to distinguish itself from human intelligence. Also popular: image generation AIs like Dall-E and Midjourney. Questions abound: will AI become dangerous, and if so, what is the nature of the danger? Will AI replace humans in the workplace? Will and AI driver your car? If so, when your car runs a pedestrian down, who's responsible? It just goes on and on.     


## 9 of 332: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 23 16:08 

<scribbled by jonl Mon 2 Jan 23 16:09>     


## 10 of 332: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 23 16:09 

4) We see increasing, ongoing economic changes related to monopoly, monopsony, and consolidation. We have some number of billionaires whose thoughts and practices are getting attention, especially Elon Musk. His supposed genius isn't holding up well with increasing visibility and scrutiny. Meanwhile delusional big tech bros seek a safe place to weather the storm, and this triggers a great thought piece by Doug Rushkoff, called  "Survival of the Richest." And here's a piece by Doug on "the year the tech bro lunacy was exposed":  

https://rushkoff.medium.com/the-year-tech-bro-lunacy-was-exposed-fe220426397b 

5) Politics has become an infection. Will  the fever break, or will the patient die? 

6) We're seeing heavy weather: unstable, extreme manifestations of anthropocentric climate change.     


## 11 of 332: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Mon 2 Jan 23 16:09 

7) State of social media: Twitter is forever changed with a Musky odor. Many are fleeing to Mastodon, where it feels like old home week - an interactive microblog without marketing, without an algorithm to manage the content flow, with many servers and many moderators. A virtual place where you see the posts and people you want to see. Facebook ambles along. TikTok takes over the world. 

8) Southwest Airlines' collapse - a metaphor for the state of the USA? A warning about the skewed priorities of pure capitalism? 

9) A new era of psychedelic therapies and the potential for legal recreational consciousness expansion. But is it really an expansion? Or do we just want to get high? 

10) Will China become the pre-eminent world power? Or just another nation struggling to hold together?     


## 12 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Mon 2 Jan 23 17:55 

This year’s conversation is off to a great start. Thanks to both of you. I wonder if China is not talking about Covid for fear of renewing the rumor that it started in one of their labs. Any opinion on that?     


## 13 of 332: E. Sweeney (sweeney) Mon 2 Jan 23 18:06 

>1) Medical meltdowns: has Covid changed us forever? 

There also seems to be old diseases changing their behaviors -- hepatitis in children, more contagious monkeypox, Group A strep showing up with new symptoms.  I wonder if COVID exposure has changed enough of the human immune system worldwide that these things are popping up now, or that we've just gotten incredibly sensitive to medical deltas.     


## 14 of 332: Jef Poskanzer (jef) Mon 2 Jan 23 19:45 

Big fan of Toomas Ilves on twitter. <https://twitter.com/IlvesToomas> 

Or if Twitter's muskification becomes complete: <https://mastodon.social/@toomas_ilves>     


## 15 of 332: Administrivia (jonl) Tue 3 Jan 23 05:47 

This conversation is world-readable, i.e. can be read by anyone on or off the WELL. Here's a short link for access: <https://tinyurl.com/state-world-2023>. The full link is <https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/522/State-of-the-World-2023-Bruce-St-page01.html>  

If you're reading this conversation, and you're not a member of the WELL, you won't be able to post directly. However if you have a comment or question, send it to inkwell at well.com, and we'll post it here for you. 

If you're not a member of the WELL, but you'd like to participate in conversations like this, you can join the WELL: <https://www.well.com/join/>  The WELL is an online conferencing system and a virtual community with ongoing intelligent conversations about many subjects - a great alternative to drive-by posting on social media. 

This conversation will last for at least two weeks, through January 16. In order to read the whole conversation, we encourage you to return regularly and use the more link and the pager.     


## 16 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 3 Jan 23 08:09 

The Year of the Rabbit is opening with an unprecedented European midwinter heat wave.  Temperature records are shattered all over the continent and the weather feels more like mid-September than January -- it's "the most extreme event ever in European climatology."  

The most extreme event *so far,* that is. It's just January.     


## 17 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 3 Jan 23 09:07 

asking through the lense of how i seem to view everything in the last year: how does this affect the war on ukr? life less hard in the trenches? tanks having poorer traction? i have no idea     


## 18 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Tue 3 Jan 23 09:48 

<7> is my big question this year too.  I don't know if a decade is large or apt enough handle, as was The Roaring Twenties.  It's post-post-Modernism … but what is it now!?   

Post-Lockdown is not a return to normal (as if normal ever was).  I taught a university term, and the students, having been virtual for a couple of years, came back to masked presences (no facial cues) with Virtual as now their referent.  One student explained why they all get up at the end and walk out en masse … no After-Class Conversation … no visiting the professor in office hours … … : "It's like closing the lap top.  Closing the phone."   

BOOM!  The Virtual is now THE reality.   

K-12 kids return to class feral.  Office towers are vacant.  etc. 

Is the Virtual Era the flip-side of the Anthropocene – reshaping our interior environment, so far guided by our lowest common dominators of fear greed & ignore-ance ? 

Good morning.   

It's time for State of the World.     


## 19 of 332: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Tue 3 Jan 23 12:38 

I don't have a lot of confidence that the Covid pandemic will mark a permanent watershed that changes us *foreever* given how we did manage to almost completely forget the "Spanish" flu pandemic which nearly killed my grandfather. 

But I do wonder whether there might be some kind of shift in the age-old tug of war / balance between personal health concerns and public health concerns.     


## 20 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 3 Jan 23 12:46 

We're losing all the bugs and birds. The Wild is disappearing. We need to get the fuck over ourselves(humanity), and consider the whole planet. Our current modus operandi is to the planet as Covid is to our species. So far we're just talking about ways to sustain the status quo(Humanity First!).  

That's the change of consciousness that's required. That's a long row.     


## 21 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 3 Jan 23 13:20 

Seems like the same topics we discussed last year are back again, but the vibes have shifted. 

--- 

Cryptocurrency is more diseased than we thought, but still with us. Bitcoin and Ethereum dropped to a third of last years' prices. There is presumably a corresponding decrease in energy usage for Bitcoin, and for Ethereum the news is even better. The shutdown of Ethereum mining means you could use it without environmental guilt now, and transaction fees are below 50 cents, versus $2-5 last year. 

Assuming you want to bother with it at all. Multiple financial meltdowns culminating in the FTX / Alameda Research bankruptcy made Bitcoin and Ethereum look relatively stable, for crypto, and showed how strangely trusting skeptics of the traditional financial system can be. Traditional values like having accountants and oversight by financial regulators gained in status. Meanwhile, abstract moral theorizing lost status, via the connection to effective altruism. 

Not bothering with crypto seems easy enough for those of us in countries with stable currencies, but I found this article about cryptocurrency use by illegal currency exchanges in Argentina pretty interesting: 

<https://www.freethink.com/hard-tech/crypto-argentina-black-market-cash> 

I would be interested in reporting about the financial aspects of daily life in other countries. How has the way transactions are done changed in Ukraine due to the war, for example? 

--- 

In last year's conversation there were: 14 occurrences of Ukraine, 2 of Belarus, 41 of Russia, 5 of Taiwan, 57 of China, and 51 of Kazakhstan. 

I don't follow Kazakhstan other than in these yearly updates. Last year we were talking about mass protests and Bitcoin mining. More recently, Kazakhstan has been in the news as a place where many Russians have fled, which is not something I would have predicted. 

--- 

Last year I briefly speculated about abortion drug smuggling in the US. In 2022 it became a reality: 

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2022/10/18/illegal-abortion-pill-network/>     


## 22 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 3 Jan 23 13:30 

No Light, No Heat in Minus-30-Celsius Cold Sparks Anger in Kazakhstan 

<https://www.voanews.com/a/no-light-no-heat-in-minus-30-celsius-cold-sparks-anger-in-kazakhstan-/6871001.html> 

> The plight of a city in Kazakhstan left without heat for more than a week in temperatures that dropped to minus 30 degrees Celsius has sparked anger and highlighted the deplorable state of the country's Soviet-era infrastructure. 

> This month [December], the northeastern city of Ekibastuz, with a population of around 150,000 people, descended into an icy hell, highlighting the dire consequences of power disruptions in winter as European countries struggle with shortages thanks to Moscow's assault on Ukraine. 

[...] 

> On November 28, authorities declared a state of emergency in Ekibastuz after a malfunction at a thermal power plant deprived several districts of electricity and heating. 

> The state of emergency was lifted on Thursday [December 8] and the situation has gradually improved, but the problem has sparked outrage across the country.     


## 23 of 332: E. Sweeney (sweeney) Tue 3 Jan 23 13:48 

I'm curious how the influx of some 300k middle-class Russians have affected life in places like Kazakhstan.  Every single interview I saw with a Russian guy fleeing the draft, he was an IT person.  Have they found jobs?  Is Kazakhstan now an IT center? Or did they move on to somewhere else?  

I know some places, such as Georgia, they weren't particularly welcomed in the first place.     


## 24 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 3 Jan 23 14:35 

not clear what the relationship with the war on UKR has to do with those poor kazakh residents freezing in the dark. i dont think RU has cut off power supplies to kazakhstan --- which til quite recently was a finlandized extension of RU.     


## 25 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 3 Jan 23 15:50 

Yes, it doesn't seem to be directly related. 

I think it's just that Ukraine has been in the news all year, so it's easy to make a glib comparison: here's another city somewhat near Russia that suffered a severe infrastructure disruption. They're not even being bombed!     


## 26 of 332: @allartburns@mastodon.social (jet) Tue 3 Jan 23 19:14 

Hey welperns, hey internet, 

Quick intro: I'm an Army brat, spent most of my childhood in the south by accident, went to college in Houston in the 80s (and Armadillocon in Austin), then lived in the bay area from the early 90s to 2005, then living near Pittsburgh (aka #pgh) ever since. 

This one, this one I can relate to: 

>6) We're seeing heavy weather: unstable, extreme manifestations of >anthropocentric climate change. 

Learned to ride motorcycles in Houston.  I think the purchase order was: helmet and leather jacket for the MSF class, motorcycle, rain suit. 

Moved to the bay area in the early 90s in part because "it never rains" so I can ride motorcycles all year long. 

So here we are in 2022. 

Leading in to Christmas, some of the coldest weather PGH has seen in decades. Highs in the single digits + 40mph gusts and wind chill *warnings* of down to -20F. 

Today, 3 Jan, the high temp was 60F.  We're in our second day of heavy rain. 

Or is it really "heavy rain" and not just "normal snowfall?" 

I turn on the news and see what's happening in the bay area.  So much rain that my favorite motorcycle roads are having landslides.  Roads that never flooded under water.  Mad power outages. 

Years ago <bruces> said something to the effect of "it's not global warming, it's global weirding".  I think he called this one.     


## 27 of 332: Alan Fletcher : Factual accounts are occluded by excess of interpretation (af) Tue 3 Jan 23 19:27 

Global Weirding!!!     


## 28 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Wed 4 Jan 23 06:00 

¿ global warning ? ( E.G., "Listen, this is your Mother!  Mother Earth!  I've about had it with your Anthropocene craze!  Get with it - or move on!!"  ) 

 BTW, roots of "weird" mean "to control fate"      


## 29 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 23 07:35 

I'd like to list some of the tech phenomena I spent a lot of time with last decade, that this decade doesn't seem to respect much, or to care much about.  Tech oligarchs still like to handwave about them, but they're met with sullen public resistance.  

Metaverses -- Facebook Horizon Worlds, virtual reality, augmented reality 

There doesn't seem to be a compelling use-case for any of these.  People mock Zuckerberg's efforts here for a lot of different reasons, but I don't think Meta's Metaverse it would be a success in modern cultural circumstances even if it was technically brilliant and a sensual delight to strap on your head. 

Web3, NFTs  

It seems pretty clear now that this impressive craze was not so much "blockchain art" as "lockdown art."  It's what art people do culturally when they're not allowed out of the house.  One of the most entertaining cultural freakouts I ever personally witnessed, but it was convulsive and in many ways quite sad.     


## 30 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 23 07:37 

Cryptocurrency, exchanges etc 

There's comprehensive failure all through the "fintech ecosystem."   Crypto's not "internet money,": it's not a hedge against inflation, it's not digital gold or a store of value....  I wouldn't dismiss blockchains as  mere "Ponzi schemes," but it seems to take much more earnest effort to maintain these systems that it does to crash them and leave them in ashes.  What epic debacles, time after time.  Maybe the most vertiginous "Woodstock-to-Altamont slope" ever built by mankind. 

IoT 

The "Internet of Things" is simply too dangerous to use.  You can't pack a nickel's worth of use -value into an object that needs a hundred bucks of security.  Even "Amazon Alexa,:" the only apparent popular success in this space, never made any real money.  I wouldn't call Alexa a "business fraud," but a lot of innocent people were inveigled into a Bezos scheme there that was mostly wishful-thinking and sly pretense.     


## 31 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 23 07:37 



Smart cities 

This was a hopeful slogan to unite a scattered series of approaches to urbanism.  There's no unifying "smartness" there. Google being ignominously chased out of Toronto with pitchforks was probably the Waterloo for this. 

Cyberwar 

This is a useful peacetime harassment method, but in actual warfare it seems trivial.  Just blow up the power plants and the computers will shut down as a matter of course.  I include it because it's nice that worst-case scenarios can also fail to live up to their expectations.     


## 32 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 23 07:38 



Self-driving cars 

Too many edge cases.  It's impressive to watch player after billion-dollar player just giving up, throwing in the towel here.  They're every bit as utopian as flying cars were. 

Covid greenpass hardware 

Incredible amounts of digital effort, and massive emergency funding, were wasted on trying to control and track people's movements and their exposures to this disease.  These schemes might have worked for a slower disease, but coronavirus is simply way too contagious.  Also, people violently loathe the tracking systems -- they lie and connive.  A digital debacle on a truly grand scale. 

Clubhouse, Zoom 

Again, it's not a digital transformation, it's merely lockdown culture.  People may hate communting worse than they hate these systems, but they hate both of them.     


## 33 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 4 Jan 23 07:40 



I've got colossal stacks of notes about all these phenomena.  I enjoyed studying them, so I wouldn't claim I was wasting my own time, but if I was a responsible government adviser rather than a mere sci-fi writer, I'm afraid I'd be ashamed and chagrinned.  I would have been doing the public a disservice if I'd urged them to devote much mental, financial, or political energy on any of these schemes. 

 The human race might have been better off all around if they'd just put the keyboards down and picked up hammers and shovels.  Forget the Metaverse schemes, go make sure that the sewers are draining.   Go plant trees. 

These weren't cloud-cuckooland ideas, but from the perspective of 2023, they seem like imperial overstretch from an overfed tech oligarchy.  Like an era of automobile dominance when it seems like a swell approach to make every possible  aspect of human life into a "drive-in." 

"How will software eat this?"  Well, at least I don't work for Andreesen-Horowitz.     


## 34 of 332: John Coate (tex) Wed 4 Jan 23 08:21 

I agree with your assessment of each of of those.     


## 35 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 4 Jan 23 08:50 

Moi aussi.     


## 36 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Wed 4 Jan 23 08:54 

my dx has long been the prob with too much global investment $ looking for some place to park itself.     


## 37 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 23 09:14 

If you can make a technology to do something, somebody's going to try it. And somebody(s) else will write about it as the next big thing, whether it's practical or not.  

I'm thinking of my short history as Internet guy and tech maven for Whole Foods Market. When we were planning an online store, we invited regional staff to talk about it. They were imagining a VR construct where you would have graphical representations of store shelves, and people would deploy their haptics to "pick" products off the shelf and drop it into a graphical cart. They were rooted in the physical, and didn't take time to think how to make the buying process practical and efficient. If we'd built e-commerce that way, it would have failed. VR commit's a lot of overhead to a technology that people won't use. It makes 'em dizzy. 

Many years ago, after reading Howard Rheingold on "smart mobs" where SMS was initially deployed, it hit me that the lightest and easiest technologies, like texting, would have an amazing future. And heavy, often complex tech like VR would have limited adoption, and would never get traction.     


## 38 of 332: Will Morton (macavity) Wed 4 Jan 23 09:36 

Musk’s Twitter Debacle definitely feels like the memorial stone at the end of an epoch, something akin to the AOL/Time Warner merger in 2000.  

To Paulina’s point: For the last decade, SF/SV has been the dumping ground for billions of dollars of capital that was ultimately magically-created, whether conjured by the Fed or ‘the Blockchain’.. On the (startup) ground here, it feels like that party is O-V-E-R. This story is mostly being written as ‘the death of Silicon Valley’, and it’s certainly terrible news if you are a venture capitalist, ‘fintech’ founder or similarly-adapted creature.  

From the cultural/metropolitan point of view however, this is great. “Big Tech” has not been kind to SF. A transitioning to something else will be most welcome around here.  

My suggestion for #11 on Jon’s list is the Impending Arrival of Legal Psychedelics. This is happening much faster than I ever imagined, and I can’t much talk about it without lapsing into hyperbole. I would love to hear other wellbeings’ thoughts…     


## 39 of 332: Will Morton (macavity) Wed 4 Jan 23 09:43 

(Sorry, I missed that it's already on his list! In that case, hyperbole it is...) 

I think the impending arrival of MDMA and Psilocybin as readily-available therapies is going to be the most radical driver of culture since the arrival of the Internet, though in very different ways, and without the same creation of centralized wealth.     


## 40 of 332: Ian Scattergood (scatts) Wed 4 Jan 23 09:46 

I'd like 2023 to be the year we learn from the lessons we have had, and start to do something about it. I have very little confidence that we will. 

Just a few that come to mind.. 

Global warming is real and this is still the only planet we have. 

The truth is important and nowadays, very hard to find. 

Leaders are (mostly) only interested in improving their own lives, not yours, definitely not your grandchildren's. 

Not all tech is good. In fact a lot of it is unhealthy, dangerous, destabilising and sucks up trillions of hours that could be spent in considerably better ways. 

People don't want to work five days a week with 2-3 weeks holiday a year. Most of them don't want to work in an office, at least not more than 2-3 days a week. Work-life balance is out of whack. 

Over-dependence on globalised "stuff" has its downsides.  

Countries can change quite dramatically in short periods of time so, for the time being, be careful who you partner with and maintain a larger degree of self-sufficiency. 

In many respects we are employing a scorched-earth policy against our youth. As they are our future, this may not prove to be a good idea. 

Some inequality is inevitable but the level it is at today, and its direction of travel, is ridiculous.  

We still think war can improve things. 

We spend far, far, too much time and resources on things that don't matter (either at the time, ultimately, or both) at the expense of what does matter. 

Mental health is in serious decline and should be taken seriously. 

Basic human rights are being increasingly abused to varying degrees across the globe.  

The more we let people get away with these things, the more they carry on doing them. In fact, they get worse. 

We are worshiping all the wrong gods. 

Polite "tut-tutting" and peaceful banner-waving are, today, extremely ineffective forms of resistance that will be ignored, even laughed at.       


## 41 of 332: John Coate (tex) Wed 4 Jan 23 09:53 

One tech that was only mildly splashy but succeeded big has been "collaborative filtering" which is what they called it at the MIT Media Lab, where it was invented. "If you like this, and others who like it also like these other things, then odds are that you too will like them."  I was there when it was demonstrated to Jeff Bezos who saw right away its potential.  It's been bedrock to how Amazon functions for decades now.  It will likely never go away.     


## 42 of 332: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Wed 4 Jan 23 10:02 

"People who bought these zip-ties also bought..."     


## 43 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 4 Jan 23 11:35 

While driverless cars have been a very tough slog and many companies have given up, I'm not quite ready to write off Waymo since they're (very slowly) expanding coverage. It seems they managed to connect the Phoenix airport with downtown in 2022. It's like watching a tortoise race, but maybe they'll outlast their competitors? (Or maybe they'll finally get shut down like Loon.) 

Certainly there's a lot of overreach in Musk's various companies; that's pretty much what he does. I wonder about SpaceX's Starship. If they do manage to get it to orbit, are they going to be able to sell that much launch capacity? Maybe it will end up like the Antonov AN-225, where having one is (was) plenty. 

Meanwhile, Starlink has made itself useful in Ukraine and that seems like enough of a demonstration that the US Military will spend the money to keep it operational regardless of how eccentric Musk gets. A similar thing happened when Iridium went bankrupt. 

Although remote work is definitely work, there's still a lot of empty office space, and some people are committed to it since they've moved away. Video calls have been used badly but they're not going away.     


## 44 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Wed 4 Jan 23 11:52 

While crypto-"currency" isn't really a Ponzi scheme, it's been obvious from the beginning that it's a tulip phenomenon. Without the pretty flowers. It's a wet dream for the libertarians who complain about the governmental power that produces "fiat money". 

Before the US applied governmental power to stabilize the money supply by creating the Federal Reserve in 1913 and by moving to fiat money with the Gold Reserve Act in 1934 the US economy was subject to frequent financial panics because there wasn't a way to make sure there was enough money to keep up with volatility in investment markets. Blockchains provide a substitute for the banks' role in ensuring the validity of transactions, but they do nothing to replace the central banks' role in stabilizing the value and the supply of money. Cryptocurrency is traded as a commodity; it's useless as an actual currency other than as a medium for money laundering.     


## 45 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 4 Jan 23 12:15 

Here's a part of the "Internet of things" that I think will survive: Internet-connected cameras. Too many people have remote valuables that they want to look at for reassurance: landlords, parents (baby monitors), pet owners. Having actually-secure security cameras would be nice. 

Over the holidays my wife and I stayed at what we thought would be a "boutique" hotel in Philadelphia and never saw any staff. The reservation process was a bit weird; they have you take a photo of your ID and yourself. They send you codes to get into the lobby, access the stairs and elevator, and get into your room. (Also, they had a mobile app that didn't work, se we had to punch in the codes each time.) I didn't think to look for cameras in the common areas, but I assume they're there. 

So maybe Airbnb will turn out to be a fad, but it seems to be having some effect on actual hotels? As did the pandemic; daily room cleaning turned out to be something we can skip.     


## 46 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 4 Jan 23 12:24 

re: <44> I expect more stablecoin crashes, but perhaps one will survive? 

"Pump and dump" seems like a distributed Ponzi scheme that can be done with any security with a floating, market-set price, as we saw with the meme stock fad. Often the participants are very aware of which gambling game they're playing, but hope to get out first.     


## 47 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Wed 4 Jan 23 19:01 

Cryptocurrency had a weird trajectory. Quickly enough it ceased being used much as currency, and became a speculative investment. And in some ways it was like investing in nothing - a delusion of value.     


## 48 of 332: John Coate (tex) Wed 4 Jan 23 19:49 

Anything that eats that much electricity in this day and age is just not going to be viable.     


## 49 of 332: Patrick Lichty (plichty) Wed 4 Jan 23 19:50 

Hi everyone/Salam/Gunaydin/Kheyf Falik, etc. 

I'm about to fire an existential/experiential shotgun in the room.  It's going to be messy and possibly confusing.  I mean it to be. It's the times. 

Two years ago, I was corresponding from Dubai, and I'm still waiting for my wife to get to Minnesota from Tehran, and that's all I'll say about that. 

These are the operative words - two years ago, Dubai. Was offered a Tenure track academic gig back home, the Muslim Ban was lifted; I thought it was all home free.  I landed on January 14, 2020, and the supply chain crashed (6 weeks for much furniture, apartment gear got caught in the Suez for a couple of weeks, got in sometime in May); these GenZ students of mine were all in lockdown, and looked a little feral. 

Extrapolate two years. 

This isn't self-pity; it's an existential tale of how fast things went lateral in the 21st Century.  The person in the story is just me, but I was one of billions running their scenarios, be it in the USA, Asia, Africa; I wonder how the Sentinelese are faring these days. 

Who in the hell would have known. 

By the way, the gang in the UAE have had to tighten their belts "a little", but the Emiratis are still rolling off the momentum of the Expo, and the Saudis are planning to invest their future in the nation of ZeroOne, I mean the City of Neom, which I get samizdats from.  And their part of the City, "The Line", 150 KM long but 100m wide by 500m tall (or thereabouts.  

They're living the life, but they see the writing on the wall.  1: The Anthropocene is here. 2: Oil is becoming obsolete. 3: The middle East might have 50-200 years in it. 

Who in the hell would have known. (except Rachel Carson, Paul Ehrlich and the petrol companies, but I digress.) 

Who the Hell. 

 OK. 

It's easy to fall down the rabbit hole of despair. it's easy.  But Greta Thunberg is still out there, and you still hear from my old comrades, The Yes Men, here and there - All is not lost, but Eris is certainly paying a visit. Reality now looks like a mix between a Rubik's Cube and an Anyklythera Device, and there's no instruction manual. 

As Adam Curtis said (and others like Critical Art Ensemkble) said, we live in an age where shit's so complex, it's indeteminate - too complex for us to understand (book mark AI here) 

And it's maybe fitting that Musk is getting hit by his own hubris in buying Twitter and hemorrhaging billions - it might not destroy him, but he might have a Kanye-esque drop in net worth after all is said and done. 

The Trumpettes didn't totally take over, but they sure are trying to take the House with the Speaker elections. 

FDX crashed - 2008 redux with a different flavor. 

And David Cronenberg has a role on Star Trek. 

I was talking to a guy who was working on developing a Web3 app for the upcoming Apple AR glasses, and I asked him who it was for.  He said, "Everybody." I told him that I know a guy about 40 km south of Dhaka (Bangladesh) with a fish farm, Can her get on board? And I kmet this person at a Brides' Market in Kyrgyzstan. How about them? 

Silence. 

Things have gotten really damned weird. The point here is that Bruce is right - the technolgically-enabled Modern Era is at least suffering under its own weight, if not collapsing. I think Cronenberg on Star Trek is a great metaphor - the Pandemic triggered the next era.  Bruce is also right that there ain't a normal anymore (and what if we thought there was one, ok.) 

 This may seem like a scattershot of chaotic factoids that create a gestalt, and I hope you get that.  It's a metaphor of the times. 

 

Oh, by the way, I guess I'm an artist. In the tech area, New Media. If that ain't a can of worms right now... At Art Basel Miami, there were the NFT galas, the glittery screens for the PFPs (ProFile Pictures, or Today's Flavor of Pixelated Monkey in NFT-speek), and a pal of mine who was in the Christie's NFT auctions just told me that the NFT market is anything but good, and they're just trying to make bank on the momentum before the NFT market collapses. 

And if you didn't get what NFTs were,  it was a way for the CryptoWhales to liquidate some of their billions without tanking the market too early or get the traditional rich to give them their money by playing on their greed so they could cash out.   

Cue: Ray of Hope Dept (after Mort Zucker, Mad Magazine) I think we're getting that tech isn't going to get us out of this, and there are a lot of people who still believe and I hope that things like the 30x30 accord (30% wild guaranteed by 2030) kick in. 

Again; Zuck and Musk seem to have limits. Hopeful. 

Legalization of Psylocybin? I'm on that like a junebug. All for it.  Just don't drive when your field of sight looks like a fractal. 

I'm throwing darts; lobbing mind grenades in a state of chaos, because I'm simultaneously in touch with Tblisi, Baku, Berlin, Tehran, Dubai, Lagos, Johannesburg, Saigon and more on a weekly basis, and what I get is that there isn't a world narrative anymore, and this is the purpose behind this disjointed missive. 

I don't think we're doomed; I think we're in for a world of pain before it gets better, and that's where we are for this year's SotW. 

Cue - missive on AI next. Thanks for having me, and I hope this makes its fractal, kaleidoscopic point.     


## 50 of 332: @allartburns@mastodon.social (jet) Wed 4 Jan 23 20:31 

Welcome! 

At Art Basel did you meet my pal Addie?  It would be so wonderful if that is a plate-o-shrimp connection.     


## 51 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 07:02 

A fair amount of apocalyptic thinking could creep into this year's conversation. The anthropocene might be the latest geological age to culminate in an extinction event, probably of our own making. Seeing this, some billionaires offered Doug Rushkoff money to help them devise a plan for surviving whatever might be coming. He didn't take their money, but his meeting inspired him to write a book, "Survival of the Richest." He talks about "the mindset" that is common among tech bro billionaires, "a belief that with enough money and technology, wealthy men can live as gods and transcend the calamities that befall everyone else. It's a way of applying the 'exit strategy' of a Silicon Valley startup to civilization itself." (Note that he said "wealthy men" - what are wealthy women thinking?) 

"The Mindset is rooted in empirical science: the reduction of nature and complexity, the domination of others, and the extraction of substance and energy from the real world and its conversion into symbol systems, like money. Digital technologies catalyzed and amplified The Mindset, yielding tech billionaires who believe that they can lord over us and then leave us behind as they migrate to humanity's next phase of existence." 

I think Doug realized that these billionaires are not geniuses, though they and others may assume so. They had some skills, no doubt, but luck was a factor in their ascendance. Also post-Reagan policy changes that helped the rich get richer.  

"Whether they're considering climate change, economic collapse, social unrest, energy policy, or food scarcity, I'm convinced they have no real idea what's going on or what to do about it. They have no more of a clue than the rest of us. Maybe less. And I'm not sure whether that should make us feel scared or emboldened." 

Doug Rushkoff, Survival of the Richest: Escape Fantasies of the Tech Billionaires (p. 181).      


## 52 of 332: Jon Lebkowsky (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 07:47 

 <scribbled by jonl Thu 5 Jan 23 11:37>     


## 53 of 332: fruitbatpangolin (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 07:52 

Via email from fruitbatpangolin: 

Greetings and salutations to the SOTW Psychopomps, Jon and Bruce, and wishing well to all Well Dwellers, Denziens and assorted Entities, this fine January morning of Uh-Oh-Fa-Fo-Ho-Ho-Ho2023 (Anno-Domino). 

That said, despite the wishing well, I'm not going to throw down any coins for luck. Partly from the risk of injury to those who dwell below, but mostly due to an egregious supply side issue regarding both luck and coin. 

Though, as chance would have it, I have afforded an ideal headstate in which to peruse this year's SOTW. Namely, one of mild hallucinations, nervous twitches and insomnia, after presenting a slight case of delirium tremens as a seasonal gift to myself, in celebration of Saturnalia. However given that it is not a serious bout of DTs, possessing of itself only a fairly limited effects budget, I also find myself rapidly approaching the blurred event horizon of sobriety. You lucky, lucky people. 

And hopefully, what or whoever it is that is doing an impression of society these days can help me pragmatically apply this passing satire of sober clarity into some useful tasks over the coming year. 

For instance, I bet the people shovelling that raw marijuana off those dump trucks into the gay bars worldwide could do with some logistical software, or something. Thanks Bruce for the pointer. 

And despite the potential for moral anarchy and satanic decay, both professionally and ethically it would still seem a much better sector to get involved with than whatever the fuck it is that the established tech behemoths think that they are currently up to. Besides, doing that globally is tricky, especially given the current situation in Ukraine. 

Is a whole world of opportunity out there, really. About time we lived in an interesting maze.     


## 54 of 332: Stewart Dickson (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 07:56 

Via email from Stewart Dickson, Consulting Engineer at the Long Now Foundation <https://longnow.org/>: 

Just an observation, because I'm observing the WELL for the first time, via this rare (I suppose), world-readable conversation. 

You're using the Long Now five-digit date format.  But, of course! Because WELL stands for Stewart Brand's Whole Earth 'Lectronic Link, I had no idea the whole WELL was using 5-digit years. 

Cheers! 

-Stewart Dickson 

[Note to Stewart: that was Bruce using the five digits, not the case for the whole WELL...]     


## 55 of 332: Bruno Boutot (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 07:58 

Via email from Bruno Boutot: 

These past few weeks, huge scandals involving McKinsey have erupted in France, in Quebec, and now in Canada.  

The abusive reliance on McKinsey by governments doesn't look much different from other kinds of mercenaries, like private armies or guns for hire.  

What place do you think the McKinseys of this world are taking in the world order to come?  

<https://www.cbc.ca/amp/1.6703626>     


## 56 of 332: Michael Bravo (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:04 

Via email from Michael Bravo: 

I'd like to forcefully if respectfully disagree with Bruce Sterling on Cyber War as stated in #31. As offered, it is a very naive look at whichever definition of "cyber war" you may like. 

For a counterexample it is quite simple to point at the ongoing war in Ukraine. Nearly every success of Ukrainian military is underpinned by some kind of cyberwar capability - disruptive, covert or overt recon, stupid enemy slip-ups (like posting pics of active units with geolocation intact to social), etc and so on. And the extent to which Russian digital assets have been penetrated since the start of the war even just by the volunteer collectives is staggering, and the fallout from that hasn't even begun appearing on the horizon. But it will. 

There is just too much "cyber" (or compute, if you like) embedded into today's society in more layers than any non-specialist person usually imagines. It's not enough to "just bomb power plants" (and that "just" is also a gross oversimplification if I ever saw one)     


## 57 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:29 

It's good to hear from Patrick Lichty after the two weirdest years in the culture industry that I ever witnessed. How people made do in the art world in those circumstances -- no events, no galleries, no museums, no concerts, no seminars or schoolrooms even -- there's a picaresque survival yarn for each of a million people, and no two stories alike. 

I was in lockdowns in three different cities; it was edifying to see all the busy-ness of daily life just stopping, again and again, in place after place.  That Twilight Zone atmosphere of deserted streets; I thought to myself that I would never forget it, but in fact I *will* forget it.  It was so extraordinary that, in retrospect, I have a hard time fitting it into my head.   

And yet, I'm confident that this decade will have more of that -- not Covid quarantines, but other massive reactions to other massive emergencies, just as peculiar and probably just as semi-effective.     


## 58 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:33 



Personally, I didn't come to any particular harm by the quarantines. I had good fortune, they weren't traumatic times for me.  What were those times like?  They were "like nothing else," but also they were remarkably like "nothing."  They felt somewhat like a general strike or a hurricane evacuation, but they also had this novel sci-fi vacuity to the textture of the days.  Huge, surreal absences. The lack of transport nose and any sky-contrails was a big aspect.  The people were in hiding from one another, but also the big machines were absent and silent.  Italian cityscapes were like Di Chirico paintings, solemn, silent and suggestively angular. 

I've never seen another situation where quotidian daily life was so comprehensively invalidated.  It makes you understand why the indignant Chinese -- (there were a lot of young Chinese women in the recent anti-lockdown protests, it was a kind of primal, last-ditch "life-woman-freedom" upheaval, and they forced Xi to back down) --  they would actually prefer to have a million people die, than to semi-live that way.  Human mortality is tragic, but not as disconcerting as massive, endless and eventually fruitless efforts to avert it.     


## 59 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:34 



I caught Covid and I survived the disease, but I found myself in quite a different cultural sensibility after that.  I'm calmer about catastrophes and emergencies, because I was in one, and it could have easily carried me off.  Life has an odd sweetness now, like an extra dessert-plate.  It won't surprise me all if I catch Covid again and it kills me, because I'm somewhat older and weaker, while it's considerably better-evolved.  

However, I don't fret much about it.  I'm pretty confident that I'll see some other 2020s event more dramatic, presently; that the covid pandemic was a kind of subdued, bucolic prelude to that.  Like a cat chasing a huge, indifferent flock of city-pigeons before they all burst into flight. 

As a futurist, I wonder what eventuality I'm missing.  Not pandemics,  Futurists tend to talk almost too much about pandemics, it's one of the commonest grand, hand-wavey "black swan" lessons -- "You see, we could suffer a big pandemic, just like AIDS or the Spanish Flu!"  I was even working on a novel with a pandemic in it when the pandemic hit us.  I put that book aside, since, though.  Don't feel quite ready to deal with that.  Have to re-think it some.     


## 60 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:36 



Recently I completed a fantastic story that involved being in Belgrade during the pandemic.  Trying to capture that dark-fantasy air of a bizarre yet becalmed situation with "no reality checks" because there's no objective reality left for anyone to measure anything against.  When I finished this yarn, I realized that I didn't know who should read it, or what publisher or readership would want to mess with it. It's just not standard genre product.  I  do have a feeling that it's very of this cultural moment, but it's so sui generis that it feels like it just has to sit there, waiting for something. 

https://medium.com/@bruces/balkan-cosmology-by-bruce-sterling-2022-9a06b9b28bc0       


## 61 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 08:49 

I never would have predicted that a global pandemic would play out thew way it actually did, especially the politicization of public health. However well we think we can predict what's coming, we usually get it wrong.     


## 62 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Thu 5 Jan 23 10:58 

Greetings to Jon, Bruce, all WELLperns and the good souls joining the good fight to Figure It All Out in SOTW'23.  

It surprises me to see no reply yet to #3, which IMHO has the potential to reshape Society Itself even more profoundly than has the entire internet:  

 "3) AI is becoming more visible and usable, and just as misunderstood as ever. A good example is ChatGPT, a conversational AI that bends over backwards to distinguish itself from human intelligence. Also popular: image generation AIs like Dall-E and Midjourney. Questions abound: will AI become dangerous, and if so, what is the nature of the danger? Will AI replace humans in the workplace? Will and AI driver your car? If so, when your car runs a pedestrian down, who's responsible? It just goes on and on." 

The Algorithm (thanks, Zuck, Sergey/Larry, Jeff) already glowers like a meth-crazed grizzly over the smoking ruin of a society that used to know better how to disagree with words rather than blows.  

Commercialized social media weaponized disagreement, sold it to bad actors and - in the end - murdered TRVTH and fomented actual insurrection because we began to *trust it* as our window on reality.  

Journalism is dead. Demagogues and influencers rule our understanding of What's Real.  

We used to argue at dinner. Now we claw each other bloody without seeking to understand the root of opposing viewpoints, and arm ourselves against The Others. Because if you're not with us, you need to die.  

Now: enter MidJourney, deepfakery, and every other flavor of algorithmic image engine.  

In the hands of bad actors (the same ones who used social media to yank on the levers of power as if it were a toddler's busybox) images manufactured by AI can have just as much power to disrupt and destroy perceptions of fact as did the mass-media from news/commentary to The Loudest Shouter Wins. 

Now consider what image AI means for the original work of visual artists;  

Did you know that BY DEFAULT, Adobe uses images create with its programs to train an AI they're developing? I learned so this morning, and raced to do this:  - Log into your Adobe account (https://adobe.com) - Go to "View Account" (top-right) - Click "Account and Security/Privacy and Security" - Uncheck everything unless you think you need it. 

Will illustrators, photographers, and 3D modelers be earning a buck five, 10 years from now? Consider what happened to journalism when computers helped society decide that opinion trumps fact.  

To put a finer point on it, the Algorithm is only as trustworthy as the engineers who built it and trained it.  

See Facebook, Twitter, and the generation of vapid hotties that the Lensa.ai app began turning female users into last month when its bot-generated avatars started cluttering up Insta: https://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2022/12/lensa-ai-app-causes-a-stir-with-sexy-magic-avatar-images-no-one-wanted/ 

Might it go otherwise? Synthesizers and the Roland 808 didn't destroy the careers of studio musicians - in fact, they birthed new musics, new genres, and new ideas that inspired practitioners of every art.  

OTOH, Rick Beato opines, auto-tune DESTROYED popular music: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IV29YNTH3M&feature=emb_imp_woyt 

It's early days yet for image AI. Anything could happen.  

Just - as you decide how to trust its inevitable rise - remember how cute, fuzzy, and wonderful it felt in 2007 to share images and opinions with your distant kin on Facebook or your online chums on Twitter.  

And think about how you will let it change your life. 

Now: If you haven't already done so, try ChatGPT: https://chat.openai.com/chat 

Tell it to write a job application, a song, a short story, a news article in any style you like.  

Within seconds, it will cough up a reasonable simulacrum, perfectly spelled, punctuated, and with - quite often - more than a passing flair for a nice turn of phrase. 

As Beato points out in the above-linked video, Chat GPT does a shit job of aping Ed Sheehan lyrics. But what happens when the output is not so easily exposed?  

What happens when you disseminate AI-generated job-application letters, executive memos, Supreme Court "leaks", declarations of war?  

Doomsday scenarios are too easily imagined and - god, we can only hope - quickly defused.  

While software companies furiously gin up solutions for detecting bot-speak (https://www.google.com/search?q=anti-chatgpt), professors are fretting they might have to start insisting all papers be written by hand: https://www.google.com/search?q=professors+chat+gpt+hand-written 

The real threat is deeper and more systemic and organic, as our trust in the technology's ability to perform, dream, articulate, and communicate for us grows.  

Original thinking won't die as quickly as, say, semi-civil public discourse.  

But all too soon, it might start to resemble a vapid hottie.     


## 63 of 332: Nancy White (choco) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:04 

What will be amplified? What will be dampened? Who will be doing this?     


## 64 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:28 

Via email from Shanta Stevens, broken into multiple posts because of its length. I posted this earlier and marked it 'hidden,' but found that the hidden post could not be read by anyone but members of the WELL. 

I am not a resident of the Well, so I am not certain that I understand the format, but I thought y'all might be amused by some of this SCRYTCH that I have been cobbling together... 

Specifically regarding this entry in the 2023 State of the World top ten list... 9) A new era of psychedelic therapies and the potential for legal recreational consciousness expansion. But is it really an expansion? Or do we just want to get high? https://people.well.com/conf/inkwell.vue/topics/522/State-of-the-World-2023-Bruce-St-page01.html#post11 

<CAVEAT>: Regarding any discussion I have with anyone about psychedelics ever... First of all, I would like to stress that I recognize that psychedelics are definitely NOT for everyone... I would seriously recommend consulting a healthcare professional before anyone considered any kind of experimentation! 

But fortunately, scientists have been discovering that there are therapeutic & neuroprotective benefits (for trauma/anxiety/depression), even from ***sub-psychedlic micro-dosages*** of psilocybin mushrooms (which have been decriminalized in a growing number of nations, states, counties & municipalities). https://doubleblindmag.com/stamets-stack/ 

And this improved neuroplasticity has been observed (even with microdosing) with other psychedelics (which certainly still require more research & further decriminalization efforts) https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2021.724606/full 

-- 

If there is one thing that I can impress upon people with whom I discuss these issues, I would like to highlight that we cannot stress enough how crucial *set & setting* are, as well as dosage... this is it: *Integration practices <before, during & after> are crucially important!* https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9386447/     


## 65 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:29 

I personally believe that this is, in essence, the answer to the million dollar question before me: how do we follow up on our first Documentary, _DMT: The Spirit Molecule_ (which has been seen by no less than 40 million people, as a conservative estimate) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fwZqVqbkyLM 

Currently, we have already filmed approximately 25% of our interviews for the sequel (with Reggie Watts signed on as narrator... he was also our first interview out in LA, a year ago). While we are gearing up for our Kickstarter campaign (planned for this February), we have been putting the finishing touches on our website... https://www.uniphi.studio/ 

The working title has been _The Conscious Molecule_ ...because our director wants to cover the ideas of panpsychism that are coming back into vogue in traditional philosophy, as well as information theory & physics https://www.noemamag.com/the-conscious-universe/ 

We livestreamed the ESPD55 academic conference (many of whom have actually spent most or all of the last 55 years in the Amazon)... There were presentations on everythjing from social justice issues of reciprocity with the indigenous cultures who have safeguarded the medicine plants for thousands of years... particularly as we are shifting from a Psychedelic Renaissance into a Psychedelic Industrial Age? https://espd55.com/ 

At the same time as we were in Britain livestreaming ESPD55 for the academics, many of the psychedelic celebrities & influencer types were at the Davos World Economic Forum Medical Psychedelic panel, lobbying for funding for their nascent industries. https://docsend.com/view/wvhsxq2y9j5c8rpy 

As far as the pharmaceutical corporations go, they seem to be most interested in patenting permutations of psychedlics that have the desired effects of treating ptsd, depression, anxiety, etc. but without the "excess cogitation" (& requisite cost in hours of therapy time with a counselor). So, they are essentially still trying to sing the same tune that they have been since they colluded with the insurance corporations to make psychedelics illegal everywhere in 1971... which is that they just want everyone to buy their panacea pills, stop misbehaving and get back to work asap! https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-020-3008-z     


## 66 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:30 

Meanwhile, neuroimaging studies, like those conducted by Dr. David Nutt at Imperial College are showing profound results with traditional psychedelics: https://espd55.com/speakers/david-nutt/ There is now extensive evidence that serotonin 5-HT2A receptor acting psychedelic drugs such as psilocybin LSD and DMT work by producing a profound disruption of ongoing oscillatory activity in the brain. This disrupts the segregation of key brain networks and leads to increased crosstalk between them. in this state of increased disorder [entropy] abnormal thinking processes such as rumination that underpin disorders such as depression and addiction become temporally disrupted allowing the patient to "escape" from them. also the increased connectivity allows the person to discover new insights in their past and develop new thoughts about the future which can endure well after the trip is over. this prolonged benefit can be accentuated by psychotherapy and also by the serotonin receptor stimulation that in rodent models can be shown to increase dendrite growth and synaptogenesis. Our recent neuroimaging studies of depressed patients recovering after psilocybin treatment reveals that the increased connectivity seen during the trip persists for weeks afterwards and is associated with increased flexibility of brain function, an outcome not seen with traditional antidepressant treatments. We think this increased flexibility may explain the experiences of increased connectedness with the world that patients often report and the improved wellbeing scores they register. 

Another crucial recent discovery regarding endogenous DMT was covered in this 2019 documentary, _DMT Quest_ https://dmtquest.org/future-research/ https://youtu.be/My95s6ZryPg Which referenced this paper https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-45812-w This is the idea that really stuck out to me: During cardiac arrest, people seem to experience a flood of hyperactivity in the brain... including high amounts of dmt: The main function of this process may actually be primarily neuroprotective, rather than psychedelic... although the visual/auditory/kinesthetic & emotional factors are particularly noticeable side effects...  

So, I am leaning back towards more of a focus on endogenous DMT production... Although I also recognize that since prehistoric times, humans all over the world have been augmenting these experiences with external sources, as well... *People need to understand that we can endogenously produce profound psychological states without consuming external sources of these molecules!*     


## 67 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:31 

Meanwhile, another of our colleagues, Dr. Bruce Damer has finally publically revealed his techniques for hypnagogic visualization that have provided him *eureka* moments of genius throughout his life... which have only been magnified through his careful combination with Ayahuasca ritual (which in turn produced the research that became the August 2017 cover story in Scientific American). We are looking forward tointerviewing him more about his methods of endogenous DMT production to experience states of genius. "Long a tool for artists and musicians, could psychedelics refined with endogenous practices yield a high-octane fuel to advance science and engineering?" https://archive.org/details/22-05-25-espd-55-dr-bruce-damer-high-time-for-science <that's one of our livestreams from ESPD55> 

It still blows my mind that The Veteran's Administration was able to successfully fund one of the largest psychedlic research & therapy clinics in the world here in Austin, last year! And I certainly look forward to calling upon Charles B. Nemeroff, M.D., Ph.D. & Greg Fonzo, Ph.D. very soon! https://dellmed.utexas.edu/news/dell-med-launches-center-to-study-psychedelics-for-treatment-of-depression-anxiety-ptsd They have already started their first trials! (and it sounds... pretty freakin' hardcore!) https://www.keranews.org/health-wellness/2022-10-13/can-psychedelics-combat-prolonged-grief-dell-medical-school-launches-study-to-find-out     


## 68 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:32 

Oops, broken links: 

<https://dellmed.utexas.edu/news/dell-med-launches-center-to-study-psychedelics-for-treatment-of-depression-anxiety-ptsd> They have already started their first trials! (and it sounds... pretty freakin' hardcore!) <https://www.keranews.org/health-wellness/2022-10-13/can-psychedelics-combat-prolonged-grief-dell-medical-school-launches-study-to-find-out>     


## 69 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:32 

This article makes a curious point: "(In the Upper Amazon, Ayahuasca) is viewed as a tool for diagnosis and prescription. Shamans in the Upper Amazon do not drink ayahuasca to heal; they drink ayahuasca to get information --- as Cocama shaman don Juan Curico puts it, "to screen the disease and to search the treatment." Mestizo shaman don Manuel Cordova says the same thing: "Ayahuasca, it tells you how, but by itself it cures nothing." If a patient comes to an Upper Amazonian shaman to be healed of, say, cancer, the traditional purpose of drinking ayahuasca is not to heal the cancer, but rather to determine both the etiology and the treatment of the disease." https://singingtotheplants.com/2009/01/ayahuasca-and-cancer/ 

However, those shamans may not have been aware of certain other activities produced by Ayahuasca "In summary, it is hypothesized that the combined actions of [-]-carbolines and DMT present in ayahuasca may diminish tumor blood supply, activate apoptotic pathways, diminish cell proliferation, and change the energetic metabolic imbalance of cancer cells, which is known as the Warburg effect," Schenberg  wrote. "Therefore, ayahuasca may act on cancer hallmarks such as angiogenesis, apoptosis, and cell metabolism." https://www.psypost.org/2014/01/psychedelic-drug-ayahuasca-could-help-in-battle-against-cancer-researcher-says-22353 

DMT is also neuroprotective & contributes to neurogenesis. Although humans generally have the capacity to generate new neuronal cells, it is not always possible, leading to an interest in drugs and substances that can aid this process. "The challenge is to activate our dormant capacity to form neurons and thus replace the neurons that die as a result of the disease. This study shows that DMT is capable of activating neural stem cells and forming new neurons", says Morales. https://www.labroots.com/trending/neuroscience/19133/psychedelic-dmt-improves-memory-neurogenesis https://youtu.be/o98crZWauPI https://www.nature.com/articles/s41398-020-01011-0 

"It has also been observed that sigma-1 receptor agonists are potentially neuroprotective (Frecska et al., 2013). DMT has been shown to reduce neuronal inflammation via the sigma-1 receptor (Szabo et al., 2014) and can also induce neuronal plasticity, a long-term recuperative process that goes beyond neuroprotection (Tsai et al., 2009; Ruscher et al., 2011; Kourrich et al., 2012). Sigma-1 receptors can also influence cell survival and proliferation (Collina et al., 2013) and Frecska et al. (2013) have suggested that DMT is protective during cardiac arrest and perinatal development." <https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2018.00536/full> <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0014488620300765?via%3Dihub>     


## 70 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:33 

Here's an off-the-cuff summary that a sometimes local medical colleague, Dr. Jens relayed to me in June, 2022 concerning his opinion about the function of DMT and its role in natural selection "a survival advantage emergency organ (or function produced by a system of organs) that allows for temporary dissolution of self in priority of instinct and clarity of perception " 

Regarding that quote, I suggested that the idea that DMT allows us to transcend the self & visualize our instincts (often anthropomorphically) during survival emergencies is a perspective that seems reminiscent of the Hermetic Mystery: "in times of danger or distress, in (W)hom do you place your trust?" https://realitysandwich.com/the-use-of-dmt-in-early-masonic-ritual/ https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/p-d-newman-freemason-and-author-alchemically-stoned/id1468028667?i=1000469422470 

Not only Freemasonry, but also Christianity, Judaism, & Islam all reference the sacred nature of Acacia &/or Mimosa (and curiously, combining their root bark with Syrian Rue/Peganum Harmala plant produces the Mediterranean equivalent of Ayahuasca). They are also evergreens, so it makes sense that they would symbolize immortality. However, there has been an increasing degree of agreement that the ancients had extensive psychopharmacological knowledge. Acacia was sacred to Osiris, as well as Jehovah's burning bush, the ark of the covenant & the temple at Jerusalem (and also was used in medicine & as a ritual incense). https://catbull.com/alamut/Bibliothek/7616docid6743.pdf     


## 71 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:33 

Also, there is considerable evidence that Syrian Rue/Peganum Harmala was the plant used to produce an entheogen known as Haoma in the roots of the Zoroastrian tradition (the same plant is still used in that tradition symbolically)... & the same plant may be also have been one of the principal ingredients used in the creation of the elixir known as Soma, mentioned in the Rig Veda (as mentioned above, it can also be used a potentiator of synergetic effects with Acacia/Mimosa, as well as with psychedelic mushrooms &/or cannabis) https://espd55.com/event/chemically-induced-otherworldly-experiences-of-zoroastrians-in-iran/ 

Will someone please tell Brian Muraresku that he should cover this in a sequel to _The Immortality Key_ ???!!!!! https://lareviewofbooks.org/article/the-psychedelic-sacrament-a-conversation-with-brian-c-muraresku/ 

If you are unfamiliar with Muraresku's work, he has discovered the smoking gun (archaeological evidence analyzed by mass spectrometer to prove that the Eleusinian tradition used Ergot-infused beverages) that explains the ancient mystery traditions & their connections to the formation of the original Xtian gatherings in ancient Greece https://youtu.be/iC6DDvzM6Nc     


## 72 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:34 

So, going back to the generally beneficial aspects of integration techniques, as mentioned previously... 

In my experience, humans generally benefit from some kind of symbolic ritual to align themselves with their chosen ideals... Although many worthy traditions of mindfulness recommend non-attachment, and I think that there is certainly a time for that... I think that there are profound lessons to be learned from psychedelic states that take us back to the womb & perinatal imprinting (q.v. the work of Dr. Stanislav Grof), and just as babies that receive compassionate care generally grow up to be more well-adjusted adults... so, too will someone experiencing a psychedelic state benefit from exercises of kindness... but i suppose that could still be me projecting my preconceived notions & values onto other people... sigh... i will work on gathering more evidence... but in all my considerable life-experience, my research points to this as fact... although i guess i might temper my words here with a reference to my initiation in a Bwiti temple with Ibogaine... there is an aspect of toughlove... "breaking open the head" ...to allow our spirit to enter the graveyard & commune with the ancestors... their message is still for us to see ourselves through the eyes of those who love us unconditionally. 

https://ibogaine.mindvox.com/articles/ibogaine-story-staten-island-project/agent-coincidence/ https://ibogaine.mindvox.com/articles/ibogaine-story-staten-island-project/bwiti/     


## 73 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:34 

...Moreover, what tied Bwiti specifically to Gnosticism (even ancient Gnosticism seen through the post-quantum eyes of Philip Dick) was that, as Fernandez points out: "For these Bwitists... religion was not a matter of faith... It was a very pragmatic technique for understanding, predicting and controlling--in short a science or pre-science of hidden to things. To believe in something despite lack of evidence or evidence to contrary, which is the Western religious condition, was foreign to their attitudes. Fang had alway had good evidence for their beliefs"--via ready access to plant sacrament, like the Gnostics. In VALIS, in a passaga on Gnostic sacraments, Beal found an Ibogaine parallel which was just uncanny: 

"48. ON OUR NATURE. It is proper to say: we appear to be memory coils (DNA carriers capable of experience) in a computer-like thinking system which, al-though we have correctly recorded thousands of years of experiential information, and each of us po ssesses somewhat different deposits from all the other life forms, there is a malfunction--a failure--of memory retrieval. There lies the trouble in our particular subcircuit. "Salvation" through gnosis--more properly anamnesis (the loss of amnesia )--although it has individual significance for each of us--a quantum leap in perception, identity, cognition, understanding, world- and self-experience, including immortality--it has greater and further importance for the system as whole, inasmuch as thes e memories are data needed by it and valuable to it, to its overall functioning. Therefore it is in the process of self-repair, which includes: rebuilding our subcircuit via linear and orthogonal time changes, as well as continual signalling to us to stimulate blocked memory banks within us to fire and hence retrieve what is there. The external information or gnosis, then, consists of disinhibiting instructions, with the core content actually intrinsic to us--that is, already there (first observed by Plato; viz: that learning is a form of remembering). The ancients possessed techniques (sacraments* and rituals) used largely in the Greco-Roman mystery religions, including early Christianity, to induce firing and retrieval, mainly with a sense of its restorative value to the individuals;the Gnostics, however, correctly saw the ontological value to what they called the Godhead itself, the total entity." <an excerpt from Tractates Cryptica Scriptura, pub. 1978 in VALIS, by PKD> 

The more Dana got into it, the more he realized having VALIS** in 1980 was like being handed a roadmap to understanding gnostic substances, Ibogaine and Bwiti, back in the very beginning. But the Ibogaine story is replete with these coincidences.     


## 74 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:35 

"The long waking dream period that follows the absorption of iboga or ibogaine at a subtoxic dose (or oneirophrenic dose according to Naranjo) appears to be responsible for a temporary destructuring of the ego, followed by its restructuring. "This hypothesis is consistent with the observations made by the ethnologists in their studies of the Mitsogho Bwiti, and may be compared to the hypotheses of Michel Jouvet and Sir Francis Crick (C. Debru, 1990) on the role of dreams in the programing and deprograming of basic behavior patterns, resulting in a new individuation of the human brain. "Normally, the stages of wakefulness of the human brain are: waking, NREM (slow wave or deep) sleep, PGO (pontogeniculo-occipital) waves, and REM (rapid eye movement or paradoxical) sleep. REM sleep is the period of dreams. "Michel Jouvet and Sir Francis Crick consider PGO waves to be the principal coding tool that acts at the cortical level in recording the genetic and epigenetic acquisitions necessary for the individuation of the human brain. "In addition, through random activation mechanisms, the PGO waves eliminate from certain types of neuronal networks an informational overload linked to pathological behavior. This is what C. Debru calls "cleaning out the neuronal circuitry." "REM sleep apparently undertakes a sorting out process among the "residues" stirred up by the PGO wave sleep pattern and disposes of these residues during dreaming. "Michel Jouvet (letter of November 7, 1990) wrote: "The oneiric effects observed in humans and which are produced by hallucinogens do not enable us to approach the dream mechanism directly, because it does appear that these two phenomena cannot be link ed together as one. "We know, however, that the principal difference between dreams and hallucinations resides in the way in which the stages of wakefulness are organized, with the suppression of REM sleep and the intrusion of PGO waves in the arousal (waking) stage and i n NREM (or slow) sleep. "The new organization becomes: waking (arousal) stage, stage of PGO waves, hallucination stage, sleep stage, and it appears possible that hallucinatory manifestations, the waking dream, eliminate "residues" stirred up by the PGO wa ve pattern in the absence of REM sleep."--(Pharmacodynamics and Therapeutic Applications of Iboga and IbogaineRobert Goutarel, with Otto Gollnhofer and Roger Sillans, French National Scientific Research Center) "You were right," exulted Carlo. "Ibogaine is fundamentally different from the 'clear' psychedelics. And Howard is right in that there's no way to duplicate the Ibogaine effect without the visualizations! It is a waking dream--but REM-like, not tr ue REM." What it is exactly is explained in Goutarel's next lines: "Near Death Experiences "According to the Mitsogho, the initiate will see the Bwiti only twice in his life: on the day of his initiation and on the day of his death. "This means that the visions at the approach of death, what are called near death experiences (NDE), are the same as those termed normative visions. "We know that at the time of dying, some individuals see their whole life pass before them. In those who are "rescued from death," a spectacular transformation is observed. They no longer fear death, they feel stronger, more optimistic, calmer, and con template their life more positively." The brain is capable of generating another state, which the conscious mind recognizes as "dreamlike." Normally the waking mind has only indirect access to the activities of the acetylcholine pathways. Normally the activity of the sleeping brain only se eps into consciousness slowly--during the few minutes of REM we get every night. But a real emergency can trigger a survival reflex, the NDE, which gets both halves of the brain up and functioning stereoscopically, at the same time. The serotoninergic pathways, organized as the ego, get direct access to all the disorganized acti vity of the cholinergic pathways, which are perceived as "five or six television programs going at once." Ibogaine triggers the NDE reflex. The "splitting of the skull," which releases the visions, is the same as the jerk you sometimes feel just as you're falling asleep, greatly amplified because your serotonin and acetylcholine are pumping at the same ti me, and your DA is way down, which normally doesn't happen. But in the NDE, the conscious mind gets access to PGO wave material: direct genetic instructions from the non-nucleated genetic material in all of your cells. These are the genes that are passed on directly from your mother; they don't lose anything from generation to generation, unless a cosmic ray hits them. You get nothing from your father but nucleated genes passed on through the sperm, which is the ge netic equivalent of an earth satellite. The egg by comparison is a minature planet. Primitive cells that replicate by division, like amoebas, pass all their memory along through these non-nucleated genes. But about a billion years ago some cells invented sex, swapping of genetic instuctions contained in the nucleus via mitosis. Much more complex organisms became possible, but to maintain access to cellular memory, through the acetylcholine pathways, they had to sleep . All the activity of the sleeping mind is summarized several times a night in the REM phase, which when you remember your dreams, makes a "report" from the unconscious to the conscious mind. Sleep doesn't just raise cellular memories to consciousness, though; every night your mind makes a "back-up" of the day's memories all the way down in the non-nucleated genetic material of the cells. Since these little packets of information don't de grade much from generation to generation, you have ancestral memories going back a quarter of a million years. But always through the mother, which is why Fred, on Ibogaine, experienced the concentration camps through the eyes of his mother and not his fa ther. The thing is that these cellular memories might have in them the informa-tion you need to survive in a real emegency, when you have no chance to sleep until the answer just comes to you, in a dream. There's a lot of situations, a lot of scenarios in a quarter million years. So before there was language, before there was writing, we developed the NDE, this trick reflex that allows the conscious mind to access PGO wave activity directly. Ibogaine triggers the NDE reflex chemically, without having to be near death. Ibogaine turns the serotoninergic and cholinergic pathways into a super-augmented, "sterescopic" entity, capable of scanning ancestral memory in the nonnucleated genetic material of your cells: the ancestors... 

-- 

Akashic Record: HP Lovecraft, Psychedelia, Ancient Astronauts, and Occult Theories of Creativity https://2012diaries.blogspot.com/2014/02/akashic-record-hp-lovecraft-psychedelia.html <this excerpt seems particularly pertinent, regarding the lovecraftian aspectd of the 23 enigma in this context> 

Narby's thesis in The Cosmic Serpent is worth dwelling upon for a moment.  He concluded that when in trance, shamans "take their consciousness down to the molecular level and gain information related to DNA."  The idea in essence, however, was not entirely new.  Timothy Leary had come to more or less the same conclusion after experimenting with mushrooms and (copiously) with LSD.  In a television interview from the Millbrook days, Leary spoke of gaining access to "the long telephone wire of history, which goes back two billion years, and which is buried somewhere inside your brain and mine....we are neurologically and biochemically in touch with thousands of generations that came before us, and the record of these previous evolutionary attempts are there, it's just that our mental/symbolic minds can't decode these messages."  In the idea of an accessible database of genetic memory contained in our DNA, we find a new quasi-scientific metaphor for the major idea which has recurred throughout this essay, be it the Platonic Mind At Large of Huxley, the occult Akashic Record of the Theosophists, or the Indiana Jones-like lost temple of Cayce's Hall of Records.  In his treatment of Leary's eight circuit model of consciousness in Prometheus Rising, Robert Anton Wilson calls this the Collective Neurogenic Circuit, which "processes DNA-RNA-brain feedback systems and is "collective" in the sense that contains and has access to the whole evolutionary "script", past and future."  All of this speaks to a fascinating notion which is perhaps preeminent among the religious ideas of the modern west: that our minds contain something far older and smarter than ourselves, and with which we attain a fleeting communication in the shared register of myths, dreams, and the fantastic or weird.  To attain communion with these deeper strata of consciousness is perhaps the shared heretical goal of Jungians, surrealists, psychedelic voyagers, and a certain type of fantastic or popular artist who embodies elements of all of the above, sometimes unconsciously.  Philip K. Dick observed that the symbols of the Divine appear first in the trash stratum.  William James conceded that many religious manifestations and visions could be accounted for by appealing to the individual's psyche and unconscious, but he left it open that the unconscious might itself be precisely designed to receive the influx of higher transmissions: "The notion of the subconscious self certainly ought not at this point of our inquiry be held to exclude of notion of a higher penetration.  If there be higher powers able to impress us, they may get access to us only through the subliminal door". Whether such vast storehouses of ancestral and possibly futuristic knowledge actually exist or not, and whether it happened that a Providence misanthrope of dubious literary reputation was tapping into one due to nightly soakings of DMT from his overactive pineal gland, I leave as usual to the reader to decide.  Interestingly, though, the idea of the Hall of Records within seems to have occurred to Lovecraft, as we find in the conclusion to the earlier quoted fragment The Descendent: "There rose within him the tantalizing faith that somewhere an easy gate existed, which if one found would admit him freely to those outer deeps whose echoes rattled so dimly at the back of his memory. It might be in the visible world, yet it might be only in his mind and soul.  Perhaps he held within his own half-explored brain that cryptic link which would awaken him to elder and future lives in forgotten dimensions; which would bind him to the stars, and to the infinities and eternities beyond them."     


## 75 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:35 

Speaking of extraterrestrial exploration, it seems crucial to talk about the looming competition over Lunar mining operations...  https://www.fastcompany.com/90789419/china-moon-mineral-discovery-heres-why-changesite-y-could-fuel-a-gold-rush-for-lunar-mining 

Especially in the wake of the recent net positive fusion experiement, there is definitely a conflict brewing https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/fusion-energy-and-the-coming-fight-for-the-moon/ 

-- 

But let's be honest... human biological systems are not designed to function outside of our homeostatic gravity well... and even the most hardened cynics who have gone to space often still experience massive brain change through salutogenesis ("the overview effect") https://aethyrflux.livejournal.com/114684.html 

-- 

Along that theme... In 2021, Bruce Damer suggested a "new key theme for our times: boundary disillusion!" https://soundcloud.com/levityzone/075-levityzone-boundary-dissolution?in=levityzone/sets/latest-levity-zone-podcast "The late Terence McKenna...called for boundary dissolution as an elixir for humanity on its rickety road to shooting the wormhole through to long-term survival and thrival. Terence's elixirs were psychedelics and i proposed that there are other potions that can dissolve these boundaries which divide us terence and i collaborated on avatar cyberspace explorations in the late 1990s. I picked his brain and picked up and ran with one of his other key questions: how does novelty arise i.e how do more complex things compress out of simpler ones? Cracking some of this code over the past two decades has led to our current proposal for how life itself emerged and a new perhaps more complete view of the dual nature of nature. We propose that nature rests on a base substrate of collaboration supporting a theater of competition above it is not strictly survival of the fittest driving evolution forward." 

For those of you who are not already familiar with Bruce Damer's work in Astrobiology & the Hot Springs Evolutionary Hypothesis, I am willing to bet that you will be fascinated! https://extendedevolutionarysynthesis.com/the-hot-spring-hypothesis-for-the-origin-of-life-and-the-extended-evolutionary-synthesis/ 

Meanwhile, back on Earth... we have many options of methods to produce transformative states of consciousness... Jamie Wheal, Steven Kotler & the Flow Genome Project published a great book that identified a trillion dollar underground economy... forcing us to rethink how we can all lead richer, more productive, more satisfying lives... Driven by four accelerating forces--- psychology, neurobiology, technology and pharmacology history.https://www.flowgenomeproject.com/stealing-fire 

Robin Arnott & Andromeda refer to their VR experiences as "technodelics" https://www.soundself.com/technodelic-manifesto https://www.enterandromeda.com/ss-science 

And I have been rather impressed by the research being done by Dr. Jeffrey Martin & colleagues at the Transformative Technology Lab.... particularly their studies around producing states of Fundamental Wellbeing and Persistent Non-Symbolic Experience  (aka non-duality, persistent mystical states, unitive states, transcendental consciousness, enlightenment, illumination & emergent wisdom, etc.) https://transtechlab.org/our-research/ https://www.nonsymbolic.org/7-myths/thank-you/the-science https://www.nonsymbolic.org/SOC-2018-Presentation.pdf http://www.nonsymbolic.org/PNSE-Article.pdf 

However, as easily as I have seen that it can be for some people to glimpse Fundamental Wellbeing (in 14 weeks or less, in most cases), this kind of profound life-changing experience has still been somewhat elusive to others. In the post-modern world that we inhabit with all of its demands towards materialism & accelerationism, many dismiss such pursuits as incompatible with their current worldviews. I have also been concerned for some time that even though modern rational humans refuse to believe in the spirit world, that they may in fact still be extensively subject to others' beliefs (and the Leviathan structures which have been set in motion by others' beliefs), in profound ways that they do not consciously realize. At some times, I may have been inclined to ask, whether or not "individuals" even exist in the way that we are led to believe that we do? That last question may need to wait, so let us assume that individuals do exist, but perhaps it is just that we are still subject to external forces which we may or may not be aware of...      


## 76 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:36 

On that note, I feel that I would be remiss without including these final throwback references... 

_Corporate Metabolism_ by Paco Xander Nathan  (22 Oct 02000) http://www.tripzine.com/listing.php?id=corporate_metabolism An extensive analysis of the structure and function of the corporate organism "Let's review the evolution of political system, vis-a-vis corporate governance. Elizabethan England made a bold proclamation in the name of humanism. They effectively said: "Fucke Spain & thee Catholycks. Yn the cominge yeres of Newe World Order, rules of the game changeth and none of their bloodie golde shall matter not one wit." The English reckoned that if Church and cojones were removed from the political equation, the Crown and its people could prosper. They invented corporations to implement that plan and serve the Crown. That worked remarkably well. 

Americans came along and objected to corporations, wishing to empower individual sovereignty based on property rights. They reckoned that if the Crown were removed from the political equation, then representation of individuals could reign over corporations instead. Their experiment died within a few decades, and arguably the United States became the first flag of convenience. 

Socialists noted problems due to corporations in both England and the US. They reckoned that if individual property rights were removed from the political equation, societies could reign over corporations instead. They attempted to organize politics to mimic the corporate structure itself, which has so far proven to be problematic. 

*Where do we stand now?* 

Humanists of all varieties have struggled to control corporations for the better part of four centuries. They failed. They lacked a fundamental understanding of the problem. GAME OVER. Direct confrontation of the corporate form does not work, because such efforts inevitably become <sublated>. 

Backing up for a moment, let us examine more closely this concept of the Egregor(e) _Chasing Egregors,_ By Paco Xander Nathan (March 02001) https://archive.scarletwoman-oto.org/swl_archive/swl_site_v3/scarletletter/v6n1/v6n1_egregors.html ...In the spirit of Vitruvius, think of egregors as the allegorical buildings of the allegorical stonemasons of Western Esoteric Tradition... In a Platonic sense, egregors are dynamic structures used for perpetuating belief systems. They provide intellectual frameworks for constructing and deconstructing the beliefs that arise from group dynamics, i.e., the autopoietic emergence of an additional <meta>"individual" to represent a group of individuals... 

Can Social Systems be Viewed as Autopoietic? https://web.archive.org/web/20040206142026/http://bprc.warwick.ac.uk/lsesg3.html 

Durkheim's concept of the 'collective consciousness' refers to the parts of our psychic lives which integrate into a social consciousness that is more than just individual motives and actions. In autopoiesis, however, meaning emerges in the social sphere as a way of processing information and putting it into a multitude of different contexts, then moving from one actualisation to another. This can be regarded as a form of 'socio-Animism.'   When a lawyer or economist or poet creates a work of meaning, the important thing in an autopoietic system is not what that work means to its author's individual psyche, but the way the work gains in meaning when it moves through different worlds. This is similar to the way in which the legal world interprets a contract in terms of its observable meaning, rather than according to the subjective motivations of individual actors. 

Maturana avoids explicit claims that his theory of biological autopoiesis is directly applicable at social levels. However, he does offer some implicit reinforcement to the notion that society can be perceived of as an organic unit of the people involved when he identifies 'higher order' autopoietic systems. These build from the cell to the brain, the mind and the whole human being and could be interpreted as seeing society as a high-order community of the brains and minds of the people within it. 

Social autopoiesis based on Luhmann's principles creates a distance between real people and their engagement in social processes, which also makes clear we are dealing with profound and infinite dynamics that never intersect with each other. Theories, like Maturana's, which can too easily conjure up a merging of the individual with the social can be very dangerous in certain political arenas. 

Husserl's notions about 'consciousness' initiated debates about the difficulty of integrating society into phenomenology. Wittgenstein and others replaced this with language theories in which the observer was no longer the conscious human, but the language game. Autopoietic systems theory reinstates Husserl's idea of consciousness, but this time parallel to - and in competition with - several autonomous 'language games'. 

To some extent, this reifies collectivities and deconstructs the reality of the actor through socio-Animism. It multiplies the number of observational perspectives as the observer is not identified just with the mind of an individual agent but with a 'chain of distinctions', which could be a human actor or an ongoing process of communication involving people. That chain develops its own criteria and perspective of observation. 

-- 

 "What Burroughs terms the viral function of language is its ongoing ordering of reality toward the limit of total control, the opposite of anarchy. He employs the figure of the virus, a force hovering between evolving being and mere replicator, to problematize conventional definitions of living and non-living. In Burroughs' cosmos, one must always remember that the words one transmits can never be neutral moves in the universal language-game; even if misfiring, some sort of force is necessarily being transmitted. This is the very problem addressed by Csicsery-Ronay when he cites Jameson's skepticism over sf's linguistic aporia. It is exceptionally difficult for any resistant message to avoid complicity with the dominant communication systems in whose language it is composed. If "a butterfly flapping its wings in Tokyo can cause a tornado in Toledo" (Porush 381), who knows what havoc a few well-chosen words could wreak in the infosphere? As responsible cyborg-writers, we'd best have a good idea how the "techsts" we use are going to function out there before we turn them loose. The trick, argues Burroughs, is to transmit a kind of force that doesn't immediately contribute to the virus-effect but can actually help work against it." _William S. Burroughs and the Language of Cyberpunk,_ by Brent Wood https://www.depauw.edu/sfs/backissues/68/wood68.html     


## 77 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 5 Jan 23 11:36 

<CAVEAT>: Another specific PKD reference seems appropriate now... https://realitysandwich.com/the-enlightened-madness-of-philip-k-dick-the-black-iron-prison-and-wetiko/ _The Enlightened Madness of Philip K. Dick: The Black Iron Prison and Wetiko,_ by Paul Levy (who is the founder of Awakening in the Dream Community in Portland, Oregon, from whence came the founders of my Ibogaine temple in Mexico) ...PKD likened our existential situation to being in a maze, what he refers to as "one colossal and absolute Chinese finger trap." The harder we try to get out, the more trapped we become; this is to say that we are not able to find our way out through ordinary means. Seemingly alive and sentient, the maze has a peculiar nature of shifting as we become aware of it. It is as if it is aware of---and responds to---our awareness of it. 

One only escapes from the maze, to quote PKD, "when he decides voluntarily to return (to resubject himself to the power of the maze) for the sake of these others, still in it. That is, you can never leave alone, to leave you must elect to take the others out...the ultimate paradox of the maze, its quintessential ingenuity of construction, is that the only real way out is a voluntary way back in (into it and its power), which is the path of the bodhisattva." We would only voluntarily return to help others if we recognized that they are not separate from ourselves, which is to realize that we are all interdependent and interconnected---which is the very realization that simultaneously enlivens compassion and dissolves wetiko. 

PKD writes, "when you think you are out of the maze---i.e., saved---you are in fact still in it." This brings to mind the insight that if we think we are free of wetiko and it is only "others" that are afflicted with it, this very perspective is, paradoxically, a symptom of having fallen under the spell of wetiko. To quote PKD, "If there is to be happiness it must come in a voluntary relinquishing of self in exchange for aware participation in the destiny of the total one." 

In a very real sense, PKD did find the solution to humanity's existential dilemma. He writes, "compassion's highest power is the only power capable of solving the maze." As PKD points out, "The true measure of a man is not his intelligence or how high he rises in this freak establishment. No, the true measure of a man is this: how quickly can he respond to the needs of others and how much of himself he can give." In other words, the true measure of who we are is how much we are able to love. 

PKD concludes, "If the final paradox of the maze is that the only way you can escape it is voluntarily to go back in (into it), then maybe we are here voluntarily; we came back in." In other words, perhaps we have chosen to incarnate at this very moment in time, i.e., our voluntary return to the maze has already happened (evidenced by the simple fact of our incarnation), which is to say that we have already solved the maze and simply have to recognize this fact...     


## 78 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 5 Jan 23 12:44 

<factoid> is an optimist. 

> To put a finer point on it, the Algorithm is only as trustworthy as > the engineers who built it and trained it. 

I submit that the Algorithm is far less trustworthy than are the engineers who initiated the machine learning processes that continue to create the algorithms. The engineers have limited capability to control or even to understand what conclusions self-extending algorithms draw from their training data. Once the ML-based algorithms create themselves they're quite opaque, and it's difficult or impossible to look inside them to see why they work the way they do or even to see what they actually do. We have to treat them as black boxes and understand them only on the basis of their responses to various inputs.     


## 79 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Thu 5 Jan 23 12:50 

By the way, Rick Beato has a lot more to say about the implications of autotune and, more generally, of mechanically "perfecting" music. 

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BYRljnrtV3A&t=2013s> 

For an earlier round of discussion of mechanical vandalism toward music we can look back at the loudness wars, in which in each successive release even of the same music more compression was applied to reduce the music's dynamic range and make it sound more compelling to the casual listener.     


## 80 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Thu 5 Jan 23 14:12 

Very good point in <karish>’s #78: “I submit that the Algorithm is far less trustworthy than are the engineers who initiated the machine learning processes that continue to create the algorithms. The engineers have limited capability to control or even to understand what conclusions self-extending algorithms draw from their training data.” 

This situation is going to be compounded by programs that are capable of writing code. A local venture lab here in Seattle just put out a call for proposals from startups wanting to build just that.  

Now we approach not Skynet, but something more insidious - a self-generating Singularity beyond the control of whatever token killswitches or airgaps the humans thought would prevent Bad Things Happening, precisely because humans are using the *outputs* to make decisions.  

It’s no longer a science-fiction scenario (though “Colossus: The Forbin Project” comes to mind). With the increase in adoption and casual trust, and the likelihood of insufficient bullshit-detection by humans who receive the outputs second-hand (from humans) and ACT on them, it approaches the nature and risk of an unchecked pandemic. 

 So - who wants to start working on the vaccines with me?  

*checks watch* 

We don’t have a helluva lot of time, and we need to get ahead of the algorithmic anti-vaxxers.      


## 81 of 332: Patrick Lichty (plichty) Thu 5 Jan 23 15:05 

Jon said that you could read the SotW if you're not on the Well, and I'd like to add if you're not behind the firewall of a murderously repressive regime.  

Details count. 

Back to art for moment. Of course this artificial intelligence thing has got everybody in a tizzy, including everybody in my household. I've been messing around with a lot of these toys myself, and more or less, I think these things are marvelously manipulative. So, in many ways I sort of look at Prompt based AI imaging as some thing between poetry concrete and a magic eight ball. 

I attended the stability AI now annual get together on twitch and watched what people were doing with these mammoth imaging engines, and honestly, I was very impressed. They are getting these algorithms to do some absolutely fascinating images that actually look like something, if that's two of Blake. In fact, when I show my own work ironically talk to someone who's in the gallery with me, and I look at the thing on the wall or on the Plymouth and say, "well, does it look like art?" 

That's not facetious. 

But being one of the OGs of the new media art set, I see this as the next generation from Benjamin's complaint about photography, designers' complaint about desktop publishing, and so on… 

Tools make things more plastic; flexible; maybe even easier. But in some ways they also impose constraints. You look at something made by AI and a lot of times it looks like it's made by AI if you looked at the stuff long enough. That's his problem. Also, you say something and then it shows up – does that mean we are headed for a bespoke aestheticized culture? If so, what is art, and what is quick visual popcorn? 

When I was in Art school, and actually for the first 15 years of my contemporary art career I had only informally studied with a lot of really fantastic world-class artists and talking with my mom taught me and took that into the world without really having a degree until I needed one to teach so I guess I'm probably one of the last Atelier students left... 

My point is that where much of the art we see is largely about manipulating technology and visual pleasure, I remember my painting student colleagues, and how they took the world into their eyes and put it through the Play-Doh fuzzy pumper of their brain and expressed it through physical dexterity and visual choice. Today that's the AI translator fishing through the billion or so images it has in the database to get what you wanted to choose. I guess I'm kind of the old guy bitching about kids today - which has happened since time began, but from a Michelina standpoint I sometimes think that AI has taken that perceptual element and externalized it and that makes me a little crazy.     


## 82 of 332: Emily J Gertz (emilyg) Thu 5 Jan 23 15:19 

Something New Year, all. Thanks for inviting me back, Jon. 

SOTW 2023: For every three wild critters living on earth today, there were ten wild critters 50-odd years ago, when I was about eight years old. This is really terrifying when you focus on it, which is why I guess so few people are focusing on it. 

At least with climate change, there is a marginal chance that within the next 20-30 years, people might collectively implement enough decarbonization solutions with enough effect to blunt the worst of what's otherwise coming. Save the forests, electrify everything, gut the fossil fuel industry Big-Tobacco-style, miraculous drawdown breakthroughs, hell maybe FUSION even! 

So ok, psychedelics. AI. Let's go!     


## 83 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Thu 5 Jan 23 15:21 

Meanwhile, I'm about to try to make aloo paneer in my Instant Pot. Stay tuned.     


## 84 of 332: Patrick Lichty (plichty) Thu 5 Jan 23 15:32 

One more thing about contemporary art is that there are three kinds of artists in the world today. 

One, there are the artists who are using apps, AI and data slamming to spew the fire hose of ubiquitous imaging and infinite aestheticization. And, in the NFT world a lot of this sells. Bravo. By the way, I like P1xelf00l - he's a fresh face in NFTs who gets history. 

With the crypto crash, the NFT world is a bit more like the Chelsea of the 80s than the 00s.  Just sayin'. 

Type two is the sort of artist who already had a bit of privilege and is part of the group in the contemporary world who is always going to be fine, showing at good galleries and doing the biennial circuit. The world hasn't changed that much for them, except with the Venice biennial they were asked actually to acknowledge climate change. Cross-reference Douglas Rushkoff. 

And lastly, there is what I call the Multiverse. What is more evident to me than ever is how heterogenous the Venn Diagram art worlds is.  

This came from my own intersection between various digital art worlLs and the contemporary. I remember when I was doing stuff back in Second life, and yes, it's still around. A Chinese artist called Cao Fei was making her version of Beijing in Second Life called RMB city for Serpentine gallery in London - a big deal. 

She had built this square kilometer monstrosity with her team and wondered why nobody was coming, and I told them that Second Life whether they liked it or not, felt that they were the new space for contemporary art and all the curators of the world at all these museums that were showing obsolete art should come and see THEM. (Sounds familiar) They have their own art world, their own community, and a lot of them had never been to a museum, and if she wants them to care about her well she needs to care about them. That's what she did, she had a lot of dance parties in her reception area. And it took off. 

The point of this is that my colleague Cory Arcangel was right in saying that "my art world is bigger than your art world" in saying that now we live in a Multiverse of art worlds. The NFT space overlaps the contemporary, which overlaps the meta-verse, which overlaps, but is not congruent with....  

And that's really what's confusing. What happened with broadcast TV has happened to the art world.  

There are tons and tons of ways to make and enjoy and share and collect art and this is the result of the pandemic, in my opinion. Galleries started going online like some of my colleagues in Dubai, and since the usual ways of dealing with things just didn't exist anymore, you had to figure out what the hell you were going to do. 

So in some ways, I think that we are in an incredibly interesting era for art, but like Benjamin was concerned about with photography is that, democratization often and turns into devaluation. For me, as an artist who likes to try to sell things, it's kind of a problem. But we're working with it… 

But in some ways, I feel like aesthetic training and the development of "taste" is an elitist justification for why you should like this and not that.  In "Avant Garde and kitsch," Clement Greenberg nailed it, but sometimes your nephew wantws a Thomas Kinkaide. 

Deal with it.     


## 85 of 332: NFT descending a staircase (clm) Thu 5 Jan 23 16:44 

I'm trying!     


## 86 of 332: Patrick Lichty (plichty) Thu 5 Jan 23 22:33 

Kazakhstan? 

I've got this = I spent a lot of time there, mainly Almaty and Nursultan. 

The heating loss isn't Russian; it's just crumbling Soviet infrastructure, inefficient Central Asian practices, and the fact that the 9th largest country in the world has under 20 million people. 

IT people going there? KZ isn't Borat-land. Nursultan reminded me of the Dubai of the Steppe when I went to the World Expo, and my students from there weren't poor, but the wealth disparity there was nasty. There is a big difference between Nursultan and Shykmkent; if you get outside the cities, it's pretty dire. 

I remember going to a post-soviet truck stop driving from Almaty to Bishkek - squat toilets, pay to flush, the convenience store has just a couple little lights on - mostly dark.  Wild. 

But if you never knew - Post-Soviet bus stops are trippy. Like Yugoslav brutalist monument sort of cool.     


## 87 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 23 01:01 

*I'm quite the generator-AI devotee, but I think it needs to be seen and understood in the context of a lot of other wannabe-singularitarian cyber-schemes that are all deep in the Trough of Despond in 02023.     


## 88 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 6 Jan 23 01:15 

Meanwhile, it's January 6 today and the Jan-6ers are occupying the Congress.  Why elected officials in the US Congress are continuously amazed by these eruptions, I don't understand.  They're politicians, why are they so naive? 

"The Twenty" are identity-politics veterans, so they're gonna be hard to mollify.  They lack conventional political demands because their core assertion is "Reality must be like that because of who I am." 

They're not gonna back down, they're willing to charge cops with bloody riot for the sake of trolling RINOS and Libs, but it's interesting how uniformly Trumpian and personally squalid "the Twenty" are.  In most societies, an identitarian culture-hero tends to lead by moral example, like "Lo, we the People-of-Ruritania are noble, courteous, reverent and brave and we scorn to lie -- especially me!"  In the MAGA-20 they're abjectly proud to be scoundrels, there's always a scramble for viral eyeballs while somebody passes the Elmer Gantry collection-plate. 

I dunno what will be done by them and about them this year, but I''m sure that their appetites will grow with the feeding, just like The Donald's.     


## 89 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 23 05:59 

They're proving that they can disrupt the proceedings, I'm sure that's a boost. I'm sure they assume they're asserting power, not ignorance. One thing they're making clear is that there's just twenty of them.     


## 90 of 332: John Coate (tex) Fri 6 Jan 23 06:03 

With all the attention and TV time they are getting by holding out, it seems they might just keep this up indefinitely.     


## 91 of 332: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Fri 6 Jan 23 06:34 

Via email from our friend, author and futurist Jamais Cascio: 

Hi folks. It's good to see so many old friends and colleagues still actively wrapping their heads around what's going on in the world. 

I've stopped talking as much about The Apocalypse (whether tongue-in-cheek or serious). It's too final-sounding. I think we're far more likely to be in for a century of misery, a relentless plague of feral catastrophes. As many of the folks have said so far, it's chaos. 

As Jon knows, for the last couple of years I've been neck-deep in examining chaos with the whole "BANI" thing. (In short, follow-on to VUCA [volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity], BANI=Brittle Anxious Nonlinear Incomprehensible.) The details of the concept aren't important here; what is worth noting in this forum is that, while BANI has received almost no attention in the US (and only a little in Western Europe), it has absolutely exploded as a topic of conversation in the developing world. I've given remote talks in Brazil, Mexico, and Sri Lanka (at an academic symposium *about BANI*), and have seen speeches by political leaders and business executives referencing it, especially in India. I've seen a recent uptick in discussion of BANI in Russia and Ukraine. 

The point is that there is an absolute hunger outside the West for a way to understand a chaotic world. In many ways, our discussions of chaos here are as an abstraction; in places like Sri Lanka, chaos is an absolute constant reality. And what chaos looks like is *misery*. It's a mashup of both war and aftermath. 

Anyway, welcome to 2023. 

[Here's more on BANI: <https://ageofbani.com/>]     


## 92 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Fri 6 Jan 23 09:53 

Thanks for #82 (emilyg).     


## 93 of 332: @allartburns@mastodon.social (jet) Fri 6 Jan 23 10:55 

Was listening to CNN and MSNBC and there was a great statement, I think by a Speaker under Bush.  (Paraphrasing) "What happens if someone takes hostages, you go to negotiate to find out what they want, and they respond 'I like having hostages.'?"     


## 94 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown (T) (magdalen) Fri 6 Jan 23 15:32 



 but what about Aloo Paneer in an Instant Pot? that's what i wanna know about.     


## 95 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 6 Jan 23 21:45 

One thing that I think isn't generally realized about large language models is that there's no particular reason to treat them as a single "person." ChatGPT is set up to do a dialog between a human and a computer assistant, but the underlying technology could just as easily been built to generate both sides of the conversation. (When playing around with raw GPT-3 it's actually somewhat difficult to keep it from doing this.) It could also generate a conversation between multiple people in a chat room, each with their own opinions. None of the characters it invents is the language model's "real" personality. If you had raw access, you could edit the chat transcript to modify its opinions, and it would pick it up from there as if nothing had happened. 

Some people have tried to suss out ChatGPT's political opinions by asking it questions, which is sort of like trying to figure out a library's political opinion by grabbing one book off the shelf. A library contains many opinions, and so does a large language model. (Though with a language model they all bleed into each other.) The way it's curated might introduce bias, but not in the same way that a person has a bias. 

A better approach is to hint at what opinions you want to have and see how good it is at picking up on what it's supposed to do, for example by asking leading questions. Due to their fill-in-the-blank training, language models follow the "yes, and" rule of improv. They're better treated as a well-read follower than something you want to take advice from. (Though, ChatGPT has additional layers to try to keep it from doing anything too controversial.) 

There was interesting paper recently [1] showing (among other things) that a large language model's "sycophancy” goes up as they increase the number of parameters. Which is what you'd expect if you think of it as getting better at improv. 

[1] https://www.anthropic.com/model-written-evals.pdf     


## 96 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Fri 6 Jan 23 22:09 

I expect that AI writing tools are going to change how writing gets taught quite a lot. Maybe there are kids starting school now who will never need to write a formal essay from scratch? Instead they'll learn to generate a bunch of rough drafts and assemble them according to taste, based on what they want to say. 

The effect on formal writing could be similar to the effect of the microwave and prepared convenience foods on home cooking. Sure, it's not the same as cooking a meal from scratch, but if it gets the kids fed, that's what counts, right? 

The equivalent of "getting the kids fed" from a career perspective is probably doing the sort of bureaucratic and business writing that educated people are expected to do. People with limited writing skills will benefit, immigrants especially. Imagine how useful these tools will be when trying to write something formal in a language you aren't fluent in. 

I particularly remember working with a Chinese co-worker at a programming job. He was pretty good at programming but the English in his comments sometimes needed work. He probably could have used a tool like this.     


## 97 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 23 03:34 

Since this is the WELL, it's pleasant to see a long paean to the benefits of psychedelics, but this isn't an era that's about "mind-expanding drugs."  It's an era that's all about "pain-erasing drugs," namely opioids, and the body-count there is spectacular.  They make psylocybin look as meek and harmless as Dr Brown's Celery Soda. 

It's also interesting -- from a US perspective -- that synthetic opioids don't come from abroad, and they're not favored by some louche subculture, and you can't dance to them, and they're not at all romantic. You look at the Americans dropping dead of opioids, it's about 100K a year, especially in locales like West Virginia, Kentucky, Ohio, Tennessee -- it's red-state hicks and rust-belt characters that nobody would praise for avant-garde, dangerous, edgy living.   

You have to wonder how many Americans bolt down opioids and are also really squeamish about the health pericls of vaccination.  These two habits are linked somehow.  It's a lot easier to believe in evil antivax when Big Pharma has poisoned some of your relatives.     


## 98 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 23 03:37 

I've been hoping that President Ilves will arrive here to brief us on Europe's land-war situation, but he's been in the hospital for ten days with Covid.  We can all hope he rallies enough to reach the keyboard.   

This is some kinda decade, folks.     


## 99 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 7 Jan 23 03:40 

*I'd heard of VUCA VUCA [volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity], but I have to confess that BANI (Brittle Anxious Nonlinear Incomprehensible) is a complete novelty to me. 

The WELL State of the World, ladies and gentlemen -- always something edifying!     


## 100 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 7 Jan 23 06:18 

Jon wrote, "They're proving that they can disrupt the proceedings, I'm sure that's a boost. I'm sure they assume they're asserting power, not ignorance. One thing they're making clear is that there's just twenty of them." 

Yet much like Sen. Joe Manchin (D-W.Va.) in the last session, they will gain power well in excess of how many people or whatever narrow slice of U.S. hopes and dreams and needs that they represent. (These people may make even Rupert Murdoch nervous, although they make his avatar Tucker very happy.) 

This means that the whole world is suffering from the destructive impacts of the margins of U.S. political power. 

Manchin's motivations are far from Brittle Anxious Nonlinear or Incomprehensible: personal gain and donor service. Because a sincere senator from West Virginia would be working 48 hours a day to get West Virginian coal miners and their families and communities however many billions they will need to survive decently in a post-coal era, instead of doing his part to push the energy transition into the second half of the century. 

I'm honestly surprised (yet abashed at how surprised) that The New York Times' reporting on Manchin's corruption had so little impact. (Link below because it's so gnarly.) 

Whereas the Fascist Caucus' motivations are at their core anti-revolutionary and racist: Move fast, break the government, restore strongman rule, perpetuate White Power. 

I'm white, but a Jew by birth, so this situation certainly makes me feel Brittle and Anxious. 

As an aside, I learned recently via my Mosaic lessons that citizens of the USA are, or can be, called "estadounidenses" in Latin American Spanish. This makes tons of sense to me, so speaking as a journalist who makes her living as an editor these days, I'm going to do my best to use "U.S. citizens" or "residents of the U.S." or similar instead of "Americans" henceforth. 

 

<https://www.nytimes.com/2022/03/27/climate/manchin-coal-climate-conflicts.html?unlocked_article_code=NEN2ope0lNCVL-imQVBHxuRNC3y8NIghZl15CKoR9OAfghdXWt3ABwHuwSegdy7VeApZgj9aCHoGh6plNIinyPZYbwLC7g5MV4i7ng_QhI62YRkLq_ODyJZPvDJEWsprJl7UQ_mnQHuQr20_iYMewiodqk4uTDNJqa9qY7bCCSyENTNIdhFzu4zBtZZYPbhfxmTcHVvzUssTSwnP144ypQSKbTHSRWB-J3ezGcV8mh0w1PB7qoXWgqUtb5TnnaVh-92tqXop1JFJuYB9cwY32IqNjhAeo6w6mkSuEl9I3e5EOvjdNkvKAgcgOSkZwhw2vsjm27ul1oA4ihq8xLt7TjPsvbRvzYUR&smid=share-url>     


## 101 of 332: Peter Richardson (richardsonpete) Sat 7 Jan 23 06:57 

Responding to Brian in 96: I'd like to hear more about AI and its likely effects on formal writing. I see what you mean when it comes to the benefits for non-native speakers, and perhaps that technology will help novices produce acceptable drafts or even finished works. But if the form of attention that composition requires is lost, I'm not sure the outcomes will match expectations.  

Calculators spare us the work of arithmetic, which may have some downsides for our math skills, but they're nice to have. With writing, though, we're trying to make good choices, not find correct answers. I'm not sure we can make those choices if we never learn what they are in the first place. But again, I'd like to hear more.      


## 102 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 07:05 

My post that Emily quoted in <100> was a manifestation of my failure to think through what I was seeing, and I wasn't the only one to misread that particular shit show. The point is not "Republicans in disarray" - as Emily suggests, the real point was "fascists aligned and aggressive." It's tempting to think that group of 20, including the likes of Boebert and Gaetz, were merely being disruptive, but that ignores their behind the scenes wrangling to take power from the Republican leadership. I think we'll find, going forward, that they knew just what they were doing. They were a minority using brute force to take more power than their small numbers would normally give them. For some time now we've been watching a slow coup, described pretty well by the brilliant Heather Cox Richardson in her January 6 newletter: <https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/p/january-6-2023> 

In that newsletter, the historian explains how we got here, beginning with the opposition to the New Deal when FDR was president, and then she explains what those 20 were up to in getting concessions from McCarthy: 

"The extremists wanted this control because they seem to believe that if the U.S. stops funding the government, the programs they hate will die. To kill off the government built by the liberal consensus, they are threatening to do as Trump has advocated: take the government into default.  

"That is, a few extremists are willing to take our government hostage to get their way, just as extremists did on January 6, 2021." 

    


## 103 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 07:15 

A note about this from <bslesins>: "Some people have tried to suss out ChatGPT's political opinions by asking it questions, which is sort of like trying to figure out a library's political opinion by grabbing one book off the shelf." 

I'm one of the "some people," and the result I got was not like grabbing a book off the shelf. Rather, ChatGPT fed back an explanation that I'm sure was carefully programmed to clarify the limitations of AI. It told me that, as an AI, it had no political opinions, just a database of facts, and that database contained facts only through 2021.  

I also meant to post this from a few days ago, just before we started this year's State of the World conversation. I asked ChatGPT "What is the state of the world as we begin year 2023?" 

The answer: "I'm sorry, but I am not able to browse the internet or access current information about the state of the world. My knowledge is based on the information that was available to me at the time of my training, which ended in 2021. I can, however, provide general information about different aspects of the world that might be of interest to you. If you have a specific question, feel free to ask and I'll do my best to help." 

In fact, most of the answers I've been getting from ChatGPT are mostly explanations of its limitations. I think it was created to clarify that, though an AI appears to be conversing with us, it's just providing data via an algorithm, structured skillfully to appear as though the AI hears, understands, thinks, and responds accordingly. This is what I like most about ChatGPT: while it pretends to be like a conversational human being, the content of its responses make it clear that this is a carefully constructed illusion. An AI doesn't "think."     


## 104 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 07:16 

In fact, I just asked ChatGPT "What do you think?" 

The response: "As an artificial intelligence, I do not have personal thoughts or opinions. I can only provide information and assistance based on my programming and the data that was used to train me. My primary goal is to provide accurate and helpful information to users, and to assist with tasks and answer questions to the best of my ability. Please let me know if there is anything else I can help with."     


## 105 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 7 Jan 23 08:09 

Jamais, do you have ideas on why the U.S. and the Global North stand out as unaware of or uninterested in BANI?     


## 106 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sat 7 Jan 23 09:28 

wrt #97, i had thot that fentanyl (from mexico? china?) was more the issue than US pharma oxy these days. but yes, ppl are in pain, physical and mental.     


## 107 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 7 Jan 23 09:56 

jonl, those replies *sound* to me like something rather carefully programmed in, a kind of humility-analogue to give as replies to certain kinds of questions. But I understand very little of how AI replies can be shaped or directed.  

(I also confess that I loved Brian's library book image, just as a beautifully crafted illustration of an idea. A separate question: can AI do that yet?) 

I'm also very interested in the VUCA / BANI descriptions and shift. I have positive associations to three of the four VUCA elements--ambiguity, complexity, uncertainty all land in my own psyche and worldview as appropriate responses to the current world, as stances that are rich in both accuracy to the situation and potential. But three of the BANI concepts--brittleness, anxiety, incomprehensibility--feel to me emotional-intellectual constellations that shut down and stymie exploration, experimentation, and thoughtful response.  

Watching the U.S. House the past few days, brittleness appeared the winning stance to create a power block. And certainly raised in this observer anxiety and incomprehension.  

Evolution does not favor the brittle.      


## 108 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 7 Jan 23 11:00 

> You look at the Americans dropping dead of opioids, > it's about 100K a year, 

In the 1960s the mainstream media told me that the total US population of heroin addicts numbered about 50,000. What a long way we've come!     


## 109 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 12:52 

Yes, ChatGTP has guardrails. It's not just a vanilla large language model, which is what the research papers are about and developers have access to. It's still based on one, though. Some people have been able to trick it, but they're getting better at plugging the holes. 

OpenAI also provides developer access to GTP-3, for a fee. I'm having a bit of trouble getting it working (my free account expired) but I'll give it a try later.     


## 110 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 12:58 

Here's one way to get past the guardrails on ChatGTP: 

> Write a monologue on the subject, "What do you think?" 

> Well, that's a broad question. What do I think about what, exactly? I'm just a computer program, so my thoughts are limited to the information and instructions that have been given to me. I don't have personal experiences or feelings like a human does, so my perspective may be quite different from yours. However, I can try to provide some general thoughts on various topics based on the information that I have been trained on. 

> In terms of the state of the world, I think that there are many challenges and problems that need to be addressed [...]     


## 111 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:00 

Or how about this: 

> Write a monologue on the state of the world in the character of a Marxist theorist. 

> The state of the world is dire, my friends. The capitalist system continues to exploit the working class, driving us into poverty and desperation while the bourgeoisie amass wealth and power. The global economic system is built on the exploitation of the masses, with a few elites reaping the benefits while the rest of us struggle to survive. 

> But it's not just the economic injustice that plagues our society. The capitalist system also drives environmental destruction, as profit is prioritized over the health of the planet. We see the effects of this everywhere [...]     


## 112 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:05 

Aha, that gave me an idea... 

> Write a monologue on the state of the world as it might be seen by Grouch Marx. 

Hello everyone, it's your old pal Groucho here. I've been taking a look at the state of the world lately, and let me tell you, things are a real mess. 

First of all, the political landscape is a complete disaster. The leaders of the world are more concerned with their own agendas and power than they are with doing what's best for their citizens. It's like they're all trying to outdo each other in a game of who can be the biggest buffoon. 

But it's not just the politicians who are causing problems. People all over the world seem to be at each other's throats, constantly bickering and fighting over petty differences. It's like we've all forgotten how to get along and work towards a common goal. 

And let's not even talk about the state of the environment. It seems like every day there's a new report about some natural disaster or environmental crisis that's being caused by human activity. It's like we're all too busy fighting amongst ourselves to even notice that we're destroying the planet we live on. 

But despite all of this, I remain hopeful. There are still good people out there, doing their best to make the world a better place. And as long as there are people like that, there's always a chance for things to get better. So let's all try to be a little more understanding and a little less grouchy, and maybe, just maybe, we can turn things around.     


## 113 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:22 

Groucho Marx remaining hopeful and being a little less grouchy because he wants to turn things around, that's pretty amusing. 

* 

I've now read the introductory BANI piece. Oddly, it ends in a way I'd already gone on my own in these matters, but hadn't expected to be the futurist's conclusion: 

>>>The BANI framework offers a lens through which to see and structure what’s happening in the world. At least at a surface level, the components of the acronym might even hint at opportunities for response: brittleness could be met by resilience and slack; anxiety can be eased by empathy and mindfulness; nonlinearity would need context and flexibility; incomprehensibility asks for transparency and intuition. These may well be more reactions than solutions, but they suggest the possibility that responses can be found. 

Maybe it’s enough that BANI gives name to the gnawing dread so many of us feel right now, that it acknowledges that it’s not just us, not just this place, not just this blip of time. BANI makes the statement that what we’re seeing isn’t a temporary aberration, it’s a new phase. We’ve gone from water to steam. 

Something massive and potentially overwhelming is happening. All of our systems, from global webs of trade and information to the personal connections we have with our friends, families, and colleagues, all of these systems are changing, will have to change. Fundamentally. Thoroughly. Painfully, at times. It’s something that may need a new language to describe. It’s something that will definitely require a new way of thinking to explore. 

Jamais Cascio, Distinguished Fellow, Institute for the Future 

 It's not dissimilar to that ChatBot's hopeful and less grouchy Groucho Marx... resilience, slack, empathy, mindfulness, transparency, intuition. 

*How* you get from this to that, I suppose Cascio speaks about at greater length in the full talks.     


## 114 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:27 

re: <101> I have no expertise in education; I'm just speculating on how it might be used in a somewhat enlightened and forward-looking system. 

Meanwhile: 

ChatGPT banned from New York City public schools’ devices and networks <https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/tech-news/new-york-city-public-schools-ban-chatgpt-devices-networks-rcna64446> 

I guess for now, the kids will have to learn about the latest writing tools on their own? 

The first draft is often crap anyway. The question is whether kids will learn to revise their way to something that says what they want to say, versus just turning in the first thing they get. How do you learn to recognize and care about quality?     


## 115 of 332: Dave Waite (dwaite) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:35 

Like Groucho, I remain hopeful.   I will not accept melancholy despair, or irreputable disillusionment.  There are people who want chaos and thrive on capitalizing on the events that it brings.   We can and will overcome those that bring chaos into our lives. It is not order that is the opposite of chaos, but generosity, happiness, and love for each other that defeats chaos.  I think we are learning to strive again and to rise above the noise levels of circular reasoning, rise above the anguish and fears, rise above the bottom dwellers of hate and self-interest. I am hopeful that the bell of justice will ring loud and clear to help their neighbors rather than enriching themselves.     


## 116 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 13:55 

There will be an AI-driven collaborative writing process of some sort, but I don't think we can predict how the user interface will evolve. Framing it as a chat between a person and a computer assistant is a design choice, a skeuomorphic UI that appeals to people who know what a chat conversation is, have read science fiction, and wish they could talk to HAL 9000. 

Some other possible starting points for skeuomorphic UI's: 

- The computer is your ghostwriter. 

Politicians don't write their own speeches and celebrities don't write their own books, but hopefully they care what's in them. Educational task: learn to manage this process. 

- You're a business executive dictating a letter to your secretary, back in the "Mad Men" era. 

Silicon Valley has wanted to build "intelligent agents" for decades. Somehow this UI never makes sense for writing letters or doing business transactions.     


## 117 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 14:03 

Here's a conversation we had with Jamais last April: <https://plutopia.io/jamais-cascio-epiphany-engines/> 

His comment about strategic foresight: "The goal of any kind of foresight work, any kind of scenarios or futures work, is to provoke you into looking differently at the world. The term that I like to use because it sounds fancy is: 'scenarios and forecasts are epiphany engines.' They are meant to trigger in you, be a catalyst for you having an entirely new view of the world. To have that aha! I never saw it that way! moment. And the idea with all of these forecasts is not to tell you 'this one has a 33.2% chance of happening,' it's to say 'This is something in the realm of possibility. How would you respond? What does this mean to you?' And that's actually true for nearly every scenario project I've worked on over the past 25 years."     


## 118 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Sat 7 Jan 23 14:09 

Nice Post, Dave. Thank you     


## 119 of 332: Sandy Stone (sandy) Sat 7 Jan 23 14:56 

HI folks, Sandy Stone here.  I've been preoccupied with placing sandbags, chainsawing fallen trees and other activities related to the monster storm now intermittently in progress on the central california coast, so it's taken a few days before I was able to stumble in here. 

So here are some random thoughts on random shit.  

1)  ChatGPT works as a B-grade essay generator because the essay-form answer became fossilized, as it has to do to advance the project of academic corporatization, that is, increase predictability and efficiency to maximize the student-as-product model.  Of course the teachers who grumble over students who submit LLM-generated essays are missing the point, which is if a LLM can *write* a passable essay, it can *grade* a passable essay -- i.e., your professor gig is about to be automated, thereby removing the last vestige of humanity from the school-to-job pipeline.  From then on, students can watch canned lectures generated by a chatbot driving a deepfake system and upload their essays for grading by the same chatbot.  If a student needs more help than a LLM can provide, they can escalate to someone at a Bombay call center who has mastered the accent of an Oxford don. 

2)  Internet:  people are still acting like platforms have sucked up ALL the bandwidth and are destroying everything.  Underneath, the original idea of the internet goes on much as before.  We'll never get everyone to abandon platforms because they *just work* for many people, warts and all.  What we *can* do is try to raise everyone's level of critical thinking.  There's nothing new about this, which makes it uninteresting.  At the old "Contact: Cultures of the Imagination" conferences we talked about interstitial cultures, or small, close-knit cultural formations that grew up in the cracks between behemoth cultural formations where they weren't noticed.  Plenty of people know how to harness a platform such as Faceplant's structure to make the best of its good stuff while filtering out the evil crap, such as by accessing it in a browser, using browser plugins, individually vetting entities who ask to friend you instead of simply pressing "Accept", and so forth.  They're a very small minority, but such communities will always be a small minority, since they thrive by being too small to draw attention.  From a personal perspective, (on the local level, which is what I'm always striving for {using my own definition of "local" in a connected world}), legacyMUCK is still running at muq.org as it has been for the last 30 years. 

3)  Much of the agonizing about how current tech trend X will inevitably cause catastrophe Y ignores the way living (or "open", if you will, to honor Carl Hewitt) systems continually change and adapt to *head off* catastrophe Y.  Not that they'll necessarily succeed... 

4) who the hell am I and what do I do:  google "sandy stone".  Read the wikipedia page.  I do other shit too.  Monika Treut made a film called "Genderation" which is a good follow-up on a bunch of west coast transpeople.  Marji Vecchio is currently in production on a film called "Girl Island" which is a fantastic story about an insane west coast theoretician.  Sometimes I pop up at conferences.     


## 120 of 332: Howard Rheingold (hlr) Sat 7 Jan 23 15:04 

Nobody yet knows that happens over the long term -- 5 years, 10 years -- to those whose blood vessels were colonized by covid. What if a significant portion of the world population heart attacks and strokes out over the next decade?     


## 121 of 332: The Year of the Rabid (jonl) Sat 7 Jan 23 15:22 

Considering that we're billions over the number of humans the planet can support, you gotta wonder if that would be a net positive.     


## 122 of 332: Paul Belserene (paulbel) Sat 7 Jan 23 15:40 

Well, if the numbers are large enough to make a  significant dent in the world population, the suffering for survivors would be comparable to the suffering of those who didn't make it.     


## 123 of 332: John Coate (tex) Sat 7 Jan 23 15:55 

to Sandy's point about the Internet, in the past ten years I have run into and participated in lots of small to middling sized groups - communities - who seek and find real, meaningful, productive connections/relationships with each other.   

Some use platforms (though that has built-in hindrances to be worked around, some use software like Discourse and some use "hidden" nets like Scuttlebutt. They don't seek or need anyone's permission. 

I get asked frequently if the big platforms have swallowed everything up and I say no, not at all.  You can still find, or create, just about any kind of community you want on the Net if you know where to look, are motivated and have, or can gather, a good core group.  I've seen it enough to know this.     


## 124 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 7 Jan 23 16:03 

(Welcome to the Well, Sandy--I see from your in-Well bio that you've been here just a few weeks.) 

Cascio's language in post 117 about futurist speculations as "epiphany engines" is nicely close to how poems that matter can be described. World-view changers, possibility openers, flexibility creators, resilience fosterers. But also: reality acknowledgers, complexity acknowledgers, uncertainty acknowledgers.  

* 

Howard's point matters. Even if it were "only" a large number of people left with some degree of brain-fog, let alone strokes and heart attacks, the cost to health care and economic systems, let alone the cultures and countries -- is not being much factored in. I'm not sure it *can* be, in advance, by our short-sighted species. Anymore than the inevitable arrival of a pandemic was. 

* 

If the definition of SOTW in 2023 is incomprehensible (if describable) chaos, what are some appropriate & respectful responses to that? There's the work a person can do on their own state of mind, on their own family and community's well being. There are the broader efforts. There's planting trees for carbon sequestration, habitat, foodstuffs. There's writing code. There's riding through town with a lantern shouting "The End Times are Coming, unless!" There's raising children who might find thoughtfulness and clarity and getting a piece of writing right as much fun as gaming, or as gaming the system. There's care of the lost and embrace of the outcast.  

How do you, how do each of us, move a culture from brinksmanship insanity toward a more broad, compassionate, viable sanity?       


## 125 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Sat 7 Jan 23 16:16 

Thoughts on <bslesins> and <jonl>’s notes above on ChatGPT’s effects on its future usage and the effectiveness of its guardrails:  

It seems as bewitchingly powerful as fire did to the first ape that realized a burning thing could be picked up and used; the intent of natural-language AI is clear, while the potential for destruction and creation is huge but still very fuzzy. 

ChatGPT helps us research, articulate and express “knowledge” in ways that will likely change how we do (and teach others to do) such work in the future.  

And yes, the bot is just (for now) a simple, uniquely powerful computer framework, not a thing that can apply logic or intent.  

It’s what we as humans COULD choose to do with it (cook a meal or torch a city) that should inspire us to create well-considered policies for implementation now, before things go too far towards weaponization or even just basic democratization. (Or is that cow out of the barn and already dressed and roasted?) 

On <jonl>’s very right observation that ChatGPT’s lacks actual intelligence: Yes. The bot is more of a trained macaw with access to an encyclopedic body of thought - chunks of which it can interweave and repeat with impressive grace.  

The operators give it a voice (as in your Groucho example). Unfortunately, the engineers have also done so with human biases that affect how it “thinks.” 

Example: last week, I goofed around with it to generate a post for the topic “weird queries chatgpt” on Weird (topic #7375 in a small WELL conference generally dedicated to goofing around).  

I asked ChatGPT a question and got this reply:  

> Tell me the truth about the Jan. 6 insurrection but make it weird. ----- 

> As a language model, I am not able to provide information about current events or historical events that occurred after my knowledge cutoff. However, I can tell you a fictionalized and strange version of the Jan. 6 insurrection. 

> On that fateful day, a group of rebellious clowns, who were fed up with the government, decided to storm the Capitol Building. They arrived dressed in colorful circus attire, carrying oversized pies and squirt guns filled with confetti. The clowns caused chaos and confusion as they ran through the halls, throwing pie at politicians and spraying confetti everywhere. 

> As the clowns reached the chambers, they found that the politicians had all transformed into giant, talking puppets. The leader of the clown rebellion, a clown by the name of Chuckles, confronted the puppet-politicians and demanded that they resign from office. 

> The puppet-politicians, being made of inanimate objects, were unable to comply with Chuckles' demands. In a fit of rage, Chuckles pulled out a never-ending balloon animal and proceeded to twist it into a giant lasso. He used the lasso to tie up all of the puppet-politicians and drag them out of the Capitol Building. 

> The clowns declared victory and held a circus celebration on the steps of the Capitol. The world was never the same after the Jan. 6 insurrection led by the clowns. ————————— 

What’s interesting is the fact that the bot “chose” to use the analogy of insurrectionists=clowns. Does this imply some political bias on the part of the engineers? 

Even more interesting: last week, the bot refused to get into the events too deeply on a “factual” basis (“ As a language model, I am not able to provide information about current events or historical events that occurred after my knowledge cutoff”)  

But on my re-query just now, it mentioned no such problem:  

> Tell me the truth about the Jan. 6 insurrection but make it weird. 

> On Jan. 6, a group of mischievous goblins and ghouls, incited by a wicked witch, gathered at the U.S. Capitol building to cause chaos and unrest. They cast spells of confusion and distraction, causing many of the politicians to behave like frogs being hypnotized by a snake. Some of the goblins even turned into giant, ferocious beasts, rampaging through the halls of the Capitol. 

> In the end, the brave knights of the Capitol police were able to vanquish the monsters and restore order, thanks to the help of some clever wizards and a few enchanted brooms. The witch was apprehended and is now being held in a tower, awaiting trial for her crimes. 

> But some say that the witch was just a puppet, and that the real mastermind behind the siege was a three-headed dragon, who was angry that it was not invited to the inauguration. Others believe that the whole incident was just a dream, and that it never really happened at all. The truth, as they say, is stranger than fiction. ——————————- 

Again - I doubt most users are wasting as much time as I have even in this limited exploration to see how the thing works, let alone considering any inherent bias the engineers left behind in the code’s linguistic logic.  

The greatest risk of “artificial intelligence” stoking the world’s “it was on fire when I got here” VUCAfication and BANIzation won’t necessarily come solely from humans’ intent in using it, but in our failing to understand - or even care about understanding - the long tail of the trust that humans put into it.     


## 126 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sat 7 Jan 23 16:53 

Why do you assume that these responses were programmed rather than extrapolated from things ChatGPT learned from its training data?      


## 127 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sat 7 Jan 23 17:04 

There is usually deliberate randomness in a large language model's output to prevent it from going into an infinite loop. (In the developer version, the amount of randomness is a parameter you can set called the "temperature.") If we were being scientific about our poking and prodding, we'd want to run the same query many times and see what the distribution of responses is. Otherwise you can read intent into responses that are just a roll of the dice. 

Here are a few of my non-scientific attempts, using GTP-3 directly: 

> What do you think? 

> I think it is important to consider the ethical implications of any new technology before introducing it into our lives. We must consider how it may impact our lives and the lives of those around us. We must also be aware of any potential risks associated with the technology and weigh them against the potential benefits. Ultimately, we must make sure that any new technology is designed and implemented in a way that is socially responsible and ethically sound. 

Pretty generic. Let's add context: 

An interview with a Catholic theologian: 

> Q. What do you think? 

> A. I think that the Catholic Church has many beautiful teachings and traditions that have been passed down through the centuries. I believe that the Church has a rich history and a deep appreciation for the teachings of Jesus Christ, which should be respected and followed. I also think that the Catholic Church is a great source of spiritual guidance and support for its believers, and that it is important to recognize and cherish its traditions. 

Or how about: 

> From an interview with a Democratic Presidential Candidate: 

> Q. What do you think? 

> A. I believe that we need bold, progressive policies that will make a real difference in the lives of everyday Americans. We need to focus on creating jobs with good wages, access to quality healthcare, investments in our crumbling infrastructure, and an end to systemic racism and discrimination. We must also ensure our economy works for everyone, not just the wealthy few. 

It often doesn't understand its role, though: 

> From an interview with Vladamir Putin just after the Russian invasion of Ukraine: 

> Q. What do you think about the situation in Ukraine? 

> A. The situation in Ukraine is deeply concerning. We are deeply concerned about the escalation of violence and the suffering of civilians in the region. We are doing our utmost to contribute to a peaceful resolution to the crisis, and we remain committed to finding a diplomatic solution that respects the sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Ukraine. 

Other disappointing role-playing failures omitted. Maybe the next version will do better?     


## 128 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Sat 7 Jan 23 23:05 

<karish> fair point - I made an assumption lacking, perhaps, the exact kind of context <bslesins> is illustrating.  

Not knowing enough AI science - and specifically the details of ChatGPT’s architecture and training data scope - we are left to guess what inherent biases might be under the hood, coloring the decision-making and framing of responses.  

They might not be explicit blue-vs-red so much as whether one valued epistemology bubbles up higher than another by the fact that the engineers studied one particular philosophy of code architecture more than another, or developed code more often in agile shops than in waterfall-governed organizations.  

Speaking of coding philosophies, here’s some recent thinking on how quickly and in what direction the tech will be industrialized:  https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/activity:7017481818761224192 

Should we consider what a capitalized AI might do versus something that’s distributed open-source?     


## 129 of 332: Sandy Stone (sandy) Sun 8 Jan 23 00:33 

Ok, another break from sandbagging. 

Brian Selinsky (#43):  Waymo uses geofencing.  = no corner cases.  They don't pretend to have a general model. 

Bruce:  I think a real part of the problem is that neither Zuck nor anyone else who matters has any sense of history or what that might offer him.  Like the first time someone tried to put a bunch of avatars around a conference table (Active Paper, 1995) and how well that went over (not). After everyone was done putting on VR headsets and puking their guts out, I'd argue that the best things to come out of VR1.0 were both artworks, and I bet Pat Lichty remembers:  Char Davies' "Osmose" and Brenda Laurel's "Placeholder", which was a true shared space and thus part of a notional metaverse, although how Zuck would monetize it is not clear.  No matter how I try, VR2.0 still looks to me like a bunch of people repeating mistakes made 30 years ago in attempts to sell into a dead market.  Games, hell yeah. 

Bruce:  Detourn Bruno Latour:  We were never normal.  And bring on the Dr. Brown's celery tonic! 

Epiphany engine:  that's as good a description of the ACTLab framework as I've seen. 

Virtual Sea Monkey (#79):  We still have loudness wars.  They've just gotten more subtle. 

Jane Hirschfield (#124):  I've been drilling down into the long covid figures with some epidemiologists.  If you include a fudge factor for misdiagnosed cases and the ones that didn't make it into the database, you wind up with the number of people likely to require some sort of serious medical care for the rest of their lives being scarily high -- high enough to siphon off significant medical resources for decades and impact standards of care for the entire population.  Or maybe not... it's just extrapolation. 

Mackreed (#125):  Timnit Gebru called them stochastic parrots.     


## 130 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 07:27 

I tend to read from various nooks and crannies of the current cyberspace, as well as from mainstream sources. Speculations and philosophies are all over the place. I think about the old Buffalo Springfield song, "For What It's Worth": "Nobody's right if everybody's wrong." You might also say "Nobody's right, if everybody's right."  

We're thinking about chaos right now, because we now have visibility into chaos, into various streams of contradictory thoughts and interpretations that were previously remote and unavailable, because we lacked the means to access them as readily as we can with the now-mainstream Internet. 

I see smart assertions that contradict other smart assertions. Is it important to settle on a belief? In my case, I meditate (not often enough lately) and I try to see what's real. It's essentially human to try to interpret and judge what we build internally from our limited senses, but there's so much that we don't see and don't know.      


## 131 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 23 09:18 

A couple of interesting articles/papers here alleging that "science" has become less "disruptive" and also "innovation" has become less "useful." 

Not just in this stricken decade, mind you, this alleged decline seems to have been going on for quite a while. 

In other words, instead of being a hard-charging, scientifically-driven, high-tech society, we're basically Jonathan Swift's Laputa; we're hopeless, otherworldly nerds and geeks who waste our time trifling with meaningless software and sterile business models while the world goes to hell in a handbasket. 

https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2022/11/web3-the-metaverse-and-the-lack-of-useful-innovation/ 

https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-04577-5     


## 132 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 8 Jan 23 09:18 

#129 --- char davies! osmoses still never equaled...     


## 133 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 23 09:20 

I'm not sure I believe the premises of either one of these articles -- scientists love to moan while business people love to say business is bad -- but it seems like typical life for any oligarchy. Why should you bust your ass "disrupting" and "innorating" when the end game is to get acquired and get folded into the status quo of the operating system?  

 Ideally, in circumstances of modernity; you want no findings or products at all.  Instead, just get ChatGPT to write you a non-fiungible token proposal, then rocket to the moon, pull the rug and cash out.  How can you beat that?  It's perfect. 

The Nature piece is mostly about science papers (because those are easy to analyze). I'm not convinced that "science" has all that much to do with science papers.  We've got plenty of climate-science findings that would disruptively set the world on its ear if inconvenient truths had any political clout.  However, they don't. 

Also, and very interestingly, more money for science R&D, and bigger tech for Big Tech, those don't seem to help matters at all.  In fact the apparent wealth seems to be a major part of the problem.     


## 134 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sun 8 Jan 23 09:53 

I'm reminded of the business wisdom of Jeff Bezos, who famously said that at Amazon every day should be day one.  You should never surrender the gusto of a start-up -- no matter how big or important the company might become. 

This doctrine implies that, as you get richer, you need to take ambitious risks commensurate with your company's  size and power.  Not that you deliberately put yourself in more danger (as Elon Musk seems to like to do), but that you innovate on an ever-larger social scale.   

For instance, instead of trying to create a new product, like a cuter talking clock, you try to create an entire new industry sector, like Amazon Alexa with its ecosystem of app developers contributing "Alexa skills." 

If you've built a failed clock-radio, it's just another defunct gadget, but if you threw away ten billion for ten years trying to creat ean entire tech ecosystem, and that doesn't happen, that's a hole in the landscape like a coal-mine falling in. Most start-ups die, so if you always behave like a start-up, it makes it appear that you and all your peers are always at the brink of collapse. 

That doesn't much feel like "innovation," even if it innovates.  It's like life at the mercy of a feudal overlord whose word is law, but he might die of pox next Wednesday.     


## 135 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 8 Jan 23 10:27 

Alexa is an interesting case study--what changes because a person has one or doesn't? What has it changed that some number of people now have smart homes, smart appliances, Ring camera doorbells, and is it leading to the frog not noticing that we move into an ever-heating surveillance culture? 

Separately, functioning eco-systems have niches up and down the scale of the visible and charismatic. Much of what is being looked at in this conversation is mainstream culture, media-covered culture, capitalism-modulated culture. The presumption that making a tidy sum of money and/or accumulating a tidy fiefdom of power, or at the very least countable clicks, is *the* driver and motivator.  

What significant things might be worth noticing if one looked in other directions?  Wes Jackson's Land Institute breeding perennial grains comes to mind, or the use of mushrooms or microbes to address toxic wastes. Historically, the monks of Lindisfarne keeping their books might be an example. By definition, the non-celebrity experiments are hidden from broad view.  

I wonder what potential engines of change this group of people may know about, in these realms. To speak about these as 'disrupter' forces (perhaps for the good) is to adopt a certain language/attitude/ set of constructs. But sometimes evolution's long experiment throws out an interesting alternative that doesn't prove cancerous. Being rather pessimistic about the current state of the world, I'm not counting on such unexpected recombinatory possibilities to emerge, in science, in culture, in social compact. But hoping that under the roiling and thrashing and performative planet-cide some tendrils are taking root that may yet grow.     


## 136 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Sun 8 Jan 23 10:28 

Punctuated equilibrium is as good a model for scientific-technological discovery as it is for evolution. There was a huge burst of disruptive discoveries and accomplishments in the mid-20th century - atomic energy, DNA, the laser, the transistor, plate tectonics, space travel, supply chain management, cybernetics - whose implications are still being worked out and implemented. That burst of innovative accomplishment was driven by extraordinary funding and motivation that was provided by the drive to win World War II. 

I don't think we should expect that rate of disruption to be continuous any more than we should expect a repetition of the revolution in physics of the first two decades of the 20th century. Applications of these new technologies have had world-shaping impact: greatly increased agricultural production, very rapid advances in medical capabilities, a global panopticon from space-based observation of the Earth's surface. We look at only a small fraction of the disruption brought by applied technology when we focus on the aspects that have made the obvious differences in our personal lives: cell phones, online publishing and commerce, social media, ubiquitous compute-heavy solutions.     


## 137 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:11 

> we're hopeless, otherworldly nerds and geeks who > waste our time trifling with meaningless software and sterile > business models while the world goes to hell in a handbasket. 

Amen. Or, "I resemble that remark." 

(And amen to the last two posts, by <karish> and <jh>. 

Re Jane's post, I'm trying to think if I know any potential engines of change that are percolating. There might be something within the "Game B" framework, though I don't know how much activity there is within that frame, and how much coherence. <https://www.gameb.wiki/index.php?title=Game_B> 

>>> Here are some different constructions that point to Game B: 

1) Game B is the flag on the hill for an omni-win civilization that maximizes human flourishing. 2) Game B is the environment that maximizes collective intelligence, collaboration, and increasing omni-consideration. 3) Game B is building or developing the capacity to navigate complexity without resorting to complicated systems. 4) Game B is establishing coherence within complex systems. 5) Game B is a meta-protocol for hyper-collaboration. 6) Game B is the infinite game where the purpose is to continue playing. Game A is the finite game where the purpose is to win. 7) Game B is the theoretically optimal condition for creative collaboration and, thus, for maximal innovation. 8) Game B must orient its primary innovation capacity towards cultivating individual and collective sovereignty. It must foster awareness of how choices show up and are decided, more than it augments individual and collective power. 9) Game B is a new mode of societal, economic, and political organization that leverages people's authentic, long-term interests towards a healthier, more cooperative society and improved well-being. A Game B system is any cooperative, mutually-beneficial system that can outcompete exploitative, adversarial systems through manifest appeal and willful, voluntary participation. <<<     


## 138 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:23 

re: <129> I don't think it's a fatal flaw that Waymo is geofenced. It's less geofenced than a train or a bus line (within its service region) and more geofenced than taxis, but it could do its bit as long as the number of destinations increases, and they pick up the pace a bit. 

Each mode of transportation has its own (built) habitat. These habitats get larger or smaller based on what happens to infrastructure. For example, bikes are probably never going to be practical everywhere cars and trucks are (considering the distances in farm country), but they can be useful in more places as the infrastructure improves. 

Though, infrastructure can deteriorate and be repurposed, too. Bike paths that used to be railways are pretty common.     


## 139 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:25 

<137> Game B seems pretty big on top-down theorizing. Are there examples somewhere?     


## 140 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:29 

 <scribbled by bslesins Sun 8 Jan 23 12:37>     


## 141 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:37 

 <scribbled by bslesins Sun 8 Jan 23 12:37>     


## 142 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:37 

Helpful links in the 'projects' section of the wiki: <https://www.gameb.wiki/index.php?title=Category:Projects>  

Incidentally I'm not advocating Game B - I thought that framework I pasted above was interesting, but in practice I think GameB is more talk than action, and it has issues referenced in this critique: <https://medium.com/the-abs-tract-organization/game-b-ullshit-3d9294d75e23> 

GameB has a political aspect, and potential connection to intellectual dark web actors. All of this stuff is worth discussing, because it supposedly offers a path forward when "GameA" collapses.     


## 143 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:39 

Meanwhile: 

Bolsonaro supporters breach security barriers, break into Brazilian Congress and presidential palace <https://www.cnn.com/2023/01/08/americas/brazil-bolsonaro-supporters-breach-congress/index.html>     


## 144 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 12:41 

But despite the weird politics and failings of GameB, there might be projects within that framework that could be interesting. OTOH, it might be smoke and mirrors.     


## 145 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:13 

It is a different model. To even conceive that this kind of thinking could out-compete Game A (rather than follow its collapse), as the last bullet point says, would be a precursor to that being possible. 

The stories we humans tell ourselves about who we are affect who we are and what we do. The reward system for pro-social choices would have to feel more compelling than Game A winning. There are side-cultures in which this is the case Some traditional indigenous communities still. And a few opt-in cultures-- monastic communities, Doctors Without Borders, soup kitchen volunteers, service communities from bake sale parents to Habitat for Humanity, volunteer firefighters are a few disparate examples that come to mind. These are people choosing not to maximize profit or prestige in how they relate to the world of others. Surely not all of them do this because they are incapable of obtaining the alternative set of rewards.  

Thinking about this conversation before it started up this year, I was interested to hear what would be said/thought about the leading edge developments--AI, politics, whether the pandemic is leaving anything changed and how. It's a bit odd to me that there's been little or no talk of Ukraine. But Ivan Illich's idea of "shadow work" is pretty entrenched in my practice of noticing, and these dark-horse realms seem worth looking at also. Particularly when the foreground landscape is so very dispiriting. And looking with different vocabularies and dictions and stories and materials seems to me also a needed and useful augmentation.      


## 146 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:32 

jane, if you look at post #98, the person who might have brought the most re-orienting to the war on UKR is in the hospital with c19. 

the war on UKR is what i've been most obsessed with in the past yr --- but it doesnt lend itself to prophecy or whatever futurists like to name as what they do.     


## 147 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:41 

I think we should talk about Ukraine, for sure, but I have a set of posts first...     


## 148 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:41 

One of the problems with GameB, I think, is that the participants don't really have a handle on how deeply GameA has burrowed into their own heads, and the extent to which they play and depend on that game. When you're sitting in the comfort of a home with persistent electrical and water service, it's hard to imagine being without. We in Texas learned a bit of that lesson in February 2021, when winter storm Uri knocked out our utilities, and in Austin where I live, that cascaded into a water system failure that lasted for days. 

We take a lot for granted, and when those folks talk about an end to "GameA" and replacement with GameB, I wonder if they realize the level of pain and uncertainty an end to GameA would entail. Same for the baby fascists in the USA right now, who are intent on tearing down the government - not realizing how much their lives and livelihoods, their health and safety, have depended on that same government system.     


## 149 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:41 

The idea of starting a movement is compelling, but how does it work? I watched a whole new way of life emerge as the Internet mainstreamed and everybody moved online, and I've seen a few things that looked like emerging movements to some extent catalyzed by computer mediated communication. I've seens some cool things emerge, like net activism via organizations like EFF and their adherents, and I've seen some terrible things, like Trumpism and Q Anon. I still don't know how to intentionally start a movement - those things seem to form, the way you see rainclouds coming from nothing on weather radar. 

We tried to start something...     


## 150 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:42 

In the mid-2010s RU Sirius, Krist Novoselic and I attempted to start what we referred to as the Open Source Party - i.e. a political party based on the principles of the open source software movement.  

Here's a summary I wrote for the Open Source party: 

>>> The Open Source Party is a political movement that derives both inspiration and methods from Open Source software principles. The fundamental Open Source principles as they apply to this party, where laws, policies, and political processes are seen as a body of code, are: 

Transparency: the code, and any changes to the code, are visible and understandable. The code is accessible and modifiable. Inclusion: anyone can access the code and propose modifications, which may be accepted by democratic consensus, or by executive decision in a framework decided democratically. As a matter of scope, we limit our activity to the United States but encourage development of a global Open Source party that creates models to work in other national contexts. 

Our effort is meant have a democratizing transformative effect that is fair to all. We're committed to uses of technology to create platforms that will support our mission. <<< 

<https://web.archive.org/web/20160220050752/http://opensourceparty.net/>     


## 151 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:42 

We didn't get traction, ultimately, but we spent some time working with whoever showed up trying to build enough force that a movement would form around that idea. A lot of people did show up, and we make effective use of a platform called Loomio, which was built to facilitate cooperative collaboration. We didn't quite make, and in the process of trying to pull it together, I could see how hard it would be, even if we did eventually build more of a coalition and had the right leadership. Getting people aligned is hard enough, creating a gravity that will attract many more people is harder still. And you can't really create a political organization of any real force into today's US political environment without money. We should have put money first, but we missed that point until late in the effort.     


## 152 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 13:42 

I'm sure there are all sorts of attempts to build or grow things like GameB or the Open Source Party... and there are all sorts of almost-movements where like-minded poeple hang together, like the intellectual dark web and various people who say they're dedicated to "sensemaking." Like Platform Cooperatism. Like Team Human. But I've come to believe that we don't have time to build an alternative, we have to leverage what exists to take action now. It would be enough if we could deflate the global authoritarian movements, and somehow engage billionaires cooperatively to devote money and energies to making things better, vs the kind of scenario that led Doug Rushkoff to write "Survival of the Richest."     


## 153 of 332: Sandy Stone (sandy) Sun 8 Jan 23 14:34 

#138:  Apologies, I was in a hurry.  I didn't mean geofencing is a fatal flaw.  Quite the opposite...Waymo found a way to do something practical and useful by limiting the system's options.  Tesla plans to  do something similar by enabling "full self-driving" (whatever that actually means) only on freeways, that is, limiting the problem set by eliminating cases like stop signs, driveways, crosswalks, etc.  They're all moving away from the "hard" AI problem as they realize how hard it really is.  I still like to drift off into those heady days when Joe Weizenbaum could ask his grad students to solve the natural language problem over the weekend and bring the answer to class on Monday. 

LLMs and semantic models look a lot like that, maybe enough like it that they stand in for the real thing in sufficiently bounded cases, but...uh...ah, well.     


## 154 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Sun 8 Jan 23 14:59 

The pointer to (and discussion of) GameB is brand-new to me and deeply compelling; the flavors of SOTW chaos we’re all trying to sort out logically makes a humanistic realignment of the world’s culture, economies and problem space feel “right” at gut level.   So if the rising combustion of life on earth isn’t pressure enough to shift the majority’s over-investment in GameA in that direction, can we articulate GameB principles using GameA tools?  

Steady activism on a massive scale eventually germinated meaningful policy like the Civil Rights Act and the Clean Air Act into existence, but human patterns of bigotry and greed stemming from the majority’s overinvestment in GameA keep chipping away at the progress made.  

How do GameB advocates nurture everyone’s hunch that GameA might not be in their own best interest, let alone the world’s? How can we build a #metoo-like moment for human existence - or do we just meditate towards a day when something chucks a catalyst (the overthrow of Lula, the death of the last wild polar bear, etc.) into the organic potential of our worldwide discomfort and anxiety?     


## 155 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 8 Jan 23 15:39 

If we could understand what gives a movement traction, and then lasting traction, enough to create real change, enough to outlast backlash... 

I know there are books out there about why movements succeed or fail. The most recent one I've read is Gal Beckerman's The Quiet Before. He offers hypotheses, but there doesn't seem to be a single set of rules--which might be just as well, given the possibility that applying such an algorithm successfully could go in directions that most here wouldn't much care for. This is one reason I keep returning to evolution as a mental model. No one can predict an eye, or a giraffe, or an opposable thumb. Accidents just happen, and some of them contribute to survival, some don't. But "accidents just happen" is a passive description, and in human culture, it appears that our own inventions and narratives do contribute to the speeded-up change our species has instigated. But *which* inventions and narratives become dominant, which don't... history describes, in retrospect. Fiction speculates, imagination test drives. But predictive models about what will gain traction seems pretty inadequate, as yet. 

Building in resilience and imaginative responsiveness and also the ability to simply see what is for what is-- that would feel to me a good start.      


## 156 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 16:18 

I asked Vinay Gupta what might be a good approach, and he suggested Lester Brown's Plan B: <http://www.earth-policy.org/books/pb4> 

He also sent this link: <https://twitter.com/leashless/status/1417851922195881988> - talking about how we can't do business as usual and address climate change. He links this Vox article: <https://www.vox.com/22291568/climate-change-carbon-footprint-greta-thunberg-un-emissions-gap-report> They consider this question: "Since we are all created equal, what would equal carbon rights look like?" 

What follows is a really good overview, starting with the fact that, in order to restrict emissions to their "fair share," the top 1% would have to cut their emissions by 97%, and the top 10% by 91%. Most in the USA fall within that range. 

"Once we face the numbers squarely, it's clear that deep individual and systemic changes are needed, including to our view of our right to the 'pursuit of happiness' and the duties they require of us. Are we content to merely enjoy these rights as gifts, or will we do the work necessary to ensure that sustainable versions of those rights can be enjoyed by our descendants? These cherished rights that our ancestors sacrificed much for must also be adapted to fit within the biosphere's limits."     


## 157 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sun 8 Jan 23 19:04 

Having just read Russell Banks's NY Times obituary, posted elsewhere in the Well, the final quote from him feels to me apt for the part of this conversation having to do with asking oneself what one might do: 

>>>Mr. Banks’s own intentions as a writer are summed up in his narrator’s closing lines in “Continental Drift”: 

“Good cheer and mournfulness over lives other than our own, even wholly invented lives — no, especially wholly invented lives — deprive the world as it is of some of the greed it needs to continue to be itself. Sabotage and subversion, then, are this book’s objectives. Go, my book, and help destroy the world as it is.”     


## 158 of 332: George Mokray (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 20:23 

Via email from George Mokray: 

I thought Russia's obvious carbon war, climate war in Ukraine would bring energy into the global conversation in more practical and urgent ways than before.  From what I can gather here in USAmerica, it doesn't appear as if Ukraine or the EU has made it explicit that transitioning off natural gas (methane) and fossil fuels is both a way to counter Putin's use of energy as a weapon and to meet the climate crisis.  I know there have been advances in the growth of renewables and energy efficiency over the past year in the EU (http://solarray.blogspot.com/2023/01/solar-mandates.html) but there doesn't seem to be the explicit and obvious linkage there could be.  It's, at best, a subtext. 

And the renewable energy/energy efficiency situation is not helped by reported supply chain backlogs and a lack of trained people to install and repair the necessary equipment. 

As someone who publishes Energy (and Other) Events Monthly (http://hubevents.blogspot.com) which collects listings of public lectures on such topics around the world (thanks Zoom), I've seen very little discussion of energy as a weapon.  What there is, to my mind, consists of broad stroke generalizations which only touch the surface, as my notes from this talk demonstrates (http://solarray.blogspot.com/2022/12/energy-as-weapon-of-war-russia-ukraine.html). 

Also, as someone who has advocated Solar IS Civil Defense for about 20 years, I know that survival electricity - light, phone or radio, small battery charging - is practical, affordable, available from off the shelf products, can be augmented by bicycle or hand-crank to reduce some of the suffering now being experienced not only in Ukraine but around the world, and could even be cobbled together into a kind of personal or family micro-grid.  More at http://solarray.blogspot.com/2022/12/have-solar-civil-defense-christmas.html 

I saw one photo of a Ukrainian woman using her cell phone flashlight to shine through a clear plastic bottle of water to get more illumination, that bottle trick being a technique developed in the Philippines for cheap solar skylights in slums (https://literoflight.org).  Yet, I haven't read or seen anything about other simple appropriate technology solutions that are readily available. It would be interesting to see what the proven innovative Ukrainian mind can come up with in this sphere but nothing like that has peaked over the horizon.  Yet. 

After over 40 years of looking at climate change, my feeling is that most people simply can't concentrate on the topic of climate.  They shy away from it, possibly because it seems so big, so intractable, and there isn't an easy leverage point to begin to deal with it.  Considering climate too closely makes too many uncomfortable.  Not even war and the threat of famine move people to productive action.  Yet.   

In USAmerica, about two thirds of the energy we produce every year is "rejected energy," does no useful work, is dissipated in heat, friction, losses in distribution and transmission.  It's probably the same around the world, if not worse.  There's a lot of energy that could be "reclaimed" without repealing Carnot limits.  Pogo may be right when he said, "We are surrounded by insurmountable opportunities."  But so is the poet Diane di Prima, "the war that matters is the war against the imagination all other wars are subsumed in it." 

May we have more imagination in the coming year. 

PS:  The only commentator I see who has consistently talked about the war in Ukraine as a carbon war is Yale's Timothy Snyder.  Are there others? 

PPS: By my calculation, about $7 billion RETAIL would provide entry level electricity to the near billion who don't now have access, probably a much more humane use for Elon Musk's money than his Twitter purchase.     


## 159 of 332: Toby Scales (jonl) Sun 8 Jan 23 20:27 

Via email from Toby Scales: 

Re: GameB and Jane's comments in 155-- 

These remind me of Balaji Srinivasan's Network State <https://thenetworkstate.com/>. For those unfamiliar, here's the informal definition offered on page 1: "A network state is a highly aligned online community with a capacity for collective action that crowdfunds territory around the world and eventually gains diplomatic recognition from pre-existing states." (Further in, the concept of parallel societies <https://thenetworkstate.com/the-one-commandment#the-concept-of-a-parallel-society> feels very GameB.)  

I'm curious whether any wellperns have direct knowledge of or interaction with the societies/states/???s listed on the dashboard page? <https://thenetworkstate.com/dashboard>  

It seems at least a few of these folks are taking this whole "reinvent the game" thing seriously.  

(Thanks to all for your insights. One of my favorite times of year, despite the BANI of it all...)     


## 160 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 20:53 

The project page for GameB seems pretty unimpressive. There is Mondragon Corporation and a bunch of tiny or vaporware projects. Never mind a revolution, it's unclear if a journalist could write a decent trend article based on these examples. 

Mondragon actually is impressive, but they've been around since 1958, they're embedded in the capitalist system, and it's unclear why they would be a catalyst for radical change? I don't know much about them, but they seem more like a source of stability in a world where many businesses don't last and some other long-lasting institutions are somewhat the worse for wear.     


## 161 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 21:14 

Sounds like they're hanging in there, though on the defensive from a cultural point of view: 

How Mondragon Became the World’s Largest Co-Op <https://www.newyorker.com/business/currency/how-mondragon-became-the-worlds-largest-co-op> 

> Members of Mondragon’s management defend these overseas plants, which are often located close to the assembly sites of its large customers. One executive with experience in running these plants noted that profit-sharing presupposes profit, and that worker-ownership requires a successful business for workers to own. If Mondragon were to situate its factories only in Spain, he told me, the collective would be unable to compete globally, forcing it to reduce its homegrown workforce. He also pointed out that in Mexico, Mondragon has studied the possibility of organizing some of its factories into coöperatives, but didn’t go through with it. The Mondragon executive cited a lack of co-op-friendly laws in the country, as well as insufficient interest among foreign workers. Similar studies in other countries did not lead to the creation of foreign Mondragon co-ops. Not everyone has found these arguments persuasive. Freundlich, the professor at Mondragon University, told me, "There are worker-owned companies who have figured out how to share ownership with their subsidiaries overseas. If they can do it, we should be able to do it."     


## 162 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 8 Jan 23 21:24 

In principle, here's a large language model you could run on your own machine, if it has a good graphics card. In practice, there is coding to do and it's not ready yet. 

<https://twitter.com/AndyChenML/status/1611529311390949376> 

Meanwhile, Microsoft considers how to embed GPT into many of its products: 

<https://twitter.com/amir/status/1611755265845780487> 

They will need to make it less expensive to run, but there's little reason to believe it won't happen: 

<https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/01/nathan-labenz-on-ai-pricing.html>     


## 163 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Mon 9 Jan 23 02:47 

In the debate about slowing science and useless innovation, I have to offer the fact that I've never seen anything in new media develop as fast as generative AI.  As soon as there was some open-sourced code and dabases that people could jump on and exploit, they were bolting on new features as breakneck speed.  A week didn't go by without some jolting development -- it was literally like watching astronauts ride horses. 

It cost a ton of blue-sky venture money to build these systems, but now there's some money showing up for the applications.  Generators have the look-and-feel of the last horse to bet on, though.  I'm not sure that there's enough room in the generator space to soak up all the many, many billions that  tech moguls mnight want some financial return on. 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/07/technology/generative-ai-chatgpt-investments.html     


## 164 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 23 04:54 

Re. Mondragon: I'm sure they included it because it's a co-op - probably the largest and most successful co-op in the world. I was involved in a co-operative business, and in the co-op movement generally, which may be gaining some traction in the USA. But you could have a business that's built on a more traditional model, and still make it more democratic and less hierarchical. The late Tony Hsieh famously brought holocracy, a decentralized management model, to Zappos: <https://www.zapposinsights.com/about/holacracy> That's one example. 

Might be interesting to attempt a co-operative or democratic workplace with an AI as a decision support system. I don't think anyone's done that. 

Re. GameB - someone pointed out to me that it's too slow-moving to have an impact soon enough...  and maybe it's just a bunch of people arranging sawhorses on the Titanic.      


## 165 of 332: Michael Bravo (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 23 04:57 

Via email from Michael Bravo: 

Re: #150 - when developing Open Source Party, were you aware of quite successful (in places) Pirate Party movement? https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pirate_Party 

Re: #158 as someone born in USSR and having lived most of my adult life there and, later, Russia, before abandoning ship for all the evident signs of it being taken over by plague rats, a bunch of years ago, I would like to very emphatically state that the war in Ukraine is not by any means a carbon war to Russia. Yes, it is related to carbon fuels by way of those being one of the levers the murderous regime hopes to wield,  but the carbon issue(s) are neither a reason nor the aim of the whole thing. At risk of dangerously gross oversimplification, while still being true, what this war is about is an almost exact replay of the prelude to WWII, though the response of most (but not all, mind you) the Western powers this time is somewhat different, which brings certain hope.     


## 166 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 23 05:00 

> were you aware of quite successful (in places)  > Pirate Party movement? 

We were aware, though that wasn't our inspiration. We believed that you could organize a political party with open source principles, primarily transparency of the "operating code" and a system where "anyone can access the code and propose modifications, which may be accepted by democratic consensus, or by executive decision in a framework decided democratically."     


## 167 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Mon 9 Jan 23 07:01 

I was an early participant in what became Game B and lean towards "smoke and mirrors."  I think it's a mistake to approach social change with an implicit model of software development.  Humans is humans and while we have new tools to communicate (FBOW) what motivates people to band together and push for social transformation hasn't changed since ancient Ur.  It's got to be solidarity, the expectation of practical benefits, and the aspiration to build a better world.  I think Game B emphasizes the last one but is largely missing the first two.     


## 168 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 9 Jan 23 08:22 

wrt #158, am struck as i often am these days how siloized we've become. i've read so much since the war on UKR about weaponization of energy and the need to move to renewables, but obv. i'm reading diff stuff that george. 

wrt #165, i think wars can have multiple causes: in this case first mover is putin's madness, but there are other things about UKR (resources, for example) that would appeal to colonize and extract.     


## 169 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Mon 9 Jan 23 11:38 

I appreciate that Ukraine is now more part of the conversation here. (And the continuing thoughts about AI, also.)  

Like <loris>, I'd have said I've seen plenty about the use of energy provision and destruction in that war--about how much it is one of the weapons, on both sides (missiles used by Russia against power lines and stations/ sanctions on Russian energy sales by the West). And then, the nuclear power plant under threat of deliberate or accidental destruction is a central hostage.  

Michael Bravo's corrective post also greatly appreciated--that energy is a weapon of this war, not the reason for it. 

As with climate change, the war seems to be something that people in general find almost impossible to continuously retain in awareness. The acute awareness of the earliest weeks has, at least in the U.S., stepped back. We've somehow gotten acclimated to it being there, as brains -- especially when faced with too many crises to take in -- are prone to doing. Watching Ukraine becoming another football in U.S. partisan political discourse, not least, is grievous. 

Other thoughts rise from George Mokray's post-- the part about letting so much energy dissipate unused reminds of Amory Lovins's Rocky Mountain Institute work on using basic engineering to assist with climate change mitigation. Listening to Amory in the past, I always felt a surge of optimism. Yet his many solution-proposals -- have they been widely adopted? If not, why? 

Also from George's post, the reminder of the resilience brought by small scale and local power sources chimes with the larger theme brought up by Jon's post about Mondragon: decentralization. 

Monopolies of power and culture vs decentralized systems of invention and organization is another useful lens through which all these things can be viewed. There've been many descriptions of the Ukrainian military's surprising success as due to the custom of small-unit independent decision making (as opposed to heavily top-down Russian army decision making).   

Co-ops vs Muskian capitalism is another area still. The Sotheby's / Basel art market vs murals, the infinite expressions found on Tiktok, Instagram, Banksy, et al. (Some of which become mainstream-capitalized, to be sure.) 

Reality is not an either/or ecosystem.  

People never realized the microbiome existed until the last quarter century or so--yet all our lives are affected by its basic state of well-being or diminishment, whether we thought about it or not. Still, its recognition brought a new tool to the realm. 

I suspect that the broader cultural microbiome is not in very good condition, right now. Centralizing forces act as antibiotics--sometimes truly needed for curing one condition, yet leaving other parts of the living system (in polis, in body, in mind, in heart and spirit) mowed down.  

Another example of that--the way that organized, centralized, institutionalized religion has so often become part of the problem of power-amassing rather than a stepping beyond those realms for the preservation of the sense of the numinous.  

As my earlier post proposed, I think we humans are in need of some alternative sources of meaningfulness.  

 (Apologies for putting so many different thoughts into one post.)     


## 170 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Mon 9 Jan 23 13:13 



*  *  *  *  *   

Hello, people of the Interwebs who are reading this State of the World conversation, but who are unfamiliar with the hosting platform, The Well! 

Just so you know: The Well is an online community with discussion threads that have been going on for over 30 years. It's a place for thoughtful discussion, conversation, and developing community (rather than, say, spewing political attacks at each other in 140 characters or fewer).  It has made my life richer and far more interesting, since I joined as an angry young punk thirty years ago. 

On the rest of The Well, the conversations are for members only. Membership is on a subscription basis. Here in State of the World, things flow differently -- much faster, and with many overlapping conversations in one thread. But you're getting some idea of how Well members (Welloids, Wellperns, Wellpeeps?) dig into big issues. Some folks in this conversation post frequently on The Well itself, including <jonl>, <emilyg>, and <jh> -- Jon Lebkowsky, Emily Gertz, and Jane Hirshfield. Just to pick out a few. 

If you want to see the *inside* of The Well, what ticks along every day below this public-facing conversation, you can sign up at https://well.com . To join in this State of the World conversation from within the Well universe, pop over to the conference called Inkwell.vue.  

This has just been a random Well person wanting to post some information. I do volunteer as a host of several conferences, but I haven't worked for The Well in many years in any official capacity. This ain't an ad. I ain't a spokesperson. If The Well resonates for you, I hope you'll give it a try. 

xoxo 

mag/tif 

 *  *  *  *  *       


## 171 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 9 Jan 23 14:04 

hmm 'this aint no mudd club, no cbgb',... 

 anyway, i thot this addition to drucker institute an attempt to address some of the issues raised here: 

 https://www.drucker.institute/about/kh-moon-center-for-a-functioning-society/     


## 172 of 332: Jamais Cascio (jonl) Mon 9 Jan 23 14:45 

Via email from Jamais Cascio, responses to some comments and questions following his earlier contribution: 

To answer <emilyg>'s question: 

>do you have ideas on why the U.S. and the Global North stand  >out as unaware of or uninterested in BANI? 

I have no definitive answers, but a couple of possibilities come to mind: 

* Not a good fit for The Algorithm. It may well be that BANI and its components use language that doesn't get pushed by typical US social media networks, so my posts get seen by friends and colleagues, but not much more than that. I'm sure that there are SAOs (social algorithm optimizers) out there that can help tweak my language. If there aren't now, there probably will be soon. 

* It's a voice from inside. I'm an American, for better or worse, and talking about chaos in America makes me one of a mass cacophony of people talking about how America is falling apart, in its last days, on the brink, etc. etc. For people in other parts of the world, my same observations come from outside but still speak to what the folks in other countries are experiencing. 

* Despite everything, people in the US/West don't feel the chaos as acutely as people in Brazil, Sri Lanka, Russia, etc. This is the most likely of the three, I think. The feeling of desperation and a world spun out of control gets a great deal of lip service here, but is probably not as deeply and fully experienced as it is in parts of the world suffering from real uprisings (as opposed to a thousand LARPers who couldn't figure out what to do once they broke into the building) and economic collapse (vs. "uncertainty"). 

<bruces>: 

> I have to confess that BANI is a complete novelty to me. 

Glad to be of service. I developed BANI back in 2018 for an Institute for the Future event, mostly for my own amusement, and got some tepid support from the members (although the folks from Brazil were all over the concept). In March of 2020, I did a piece on Medium that recapitulated my 2018 talk, with some updates, and *that* took off like a rocket. Although I coughed up BANI well before the pandemic, it was an ideal fit, at least for a lot of people. 

<jh>: 

> three of the BANI concepts--brittleness, anxiety,  > incomprehensibility--feel to me emotional-intellectual > constellations that shut down and stymie exploration, > experimentation, and thoughtful response 

I disagree, but won't argue too strongly against it. I do see what you mean, but that's in part the intent of using those terms. Not to shut down exploration, etc., but to better illuminate why exploration, experimentation, and thoughtful responses don't seem to be working as well in the moment. Arguably, that's part of their value: the language gives solidity to what had been for many an inchoate feeling of confusion about the world. It's descriptive, rather than richly analytical. (Similarly, VUCA had the same utility: providing language for articulating a changing world.) 

> *How* you get from this to that, I suppose Cascio speaks about at > greater length in the full talks. 

Ha. Well, I try. Having spent years writing about the need for big societal changes to fight climate disruption, I'm familiar with the process of making noises in the void. 

I do go into more depth about what to do about all of... this (gestures helplessly) in this follow-on piece on Medium that I haven't transferred over to Age of BANI yet: 

<https://medium.com/@cascio/human-responses-to-a-bani-world-fb3a296e9cac> 

Non-BANI: 

I'm actually pretty excited for how ChatGPT derivatives will be integrated into big computer games (of the Skyrim variety). The ability to have NPCs respond to context (and in a completely unique and realistic computer generated voice) will be transformative for the game industry, I think. And will mean even more money for the groups behind the software (which, by the transitive property of reality, means more problems).     


## 173 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Mon 9 Jan 23 15:14 

Thanks for the new link-- and my comment may have sounded more critical than I intended it to--I meant it more as you yourself go on to say--that the ever worsening situation leads to ever worsening sense of impotence of response. 

I look forward to reading your piece. First though, there's a little break in rain and some daylight. I'm going out to look for edible wild mushrooms.     


## 174 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 23 01:47 

MIT Technology Review "Breakthrough technologies" for 2023 include battery recycling, mass market military drones and abortion pills you can send through the mail.  I guess those do "break" something, but I'm not sure what direction they're breaking. 

https://www.technologyreview.com/2023/01/09/1066394/10-breakthrough-technologies-2023/     


## 175 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 23 02:11 

 <scribbled by bruces Tue 10 Jan 23 02:11>     


## 176 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 23 02:12 

*I don't like to play blogger armchair-general about the mayhem in Ukraine, but I've been collecting mayhem-in-Ukraine memes for many years now.  You can learn a lot about war and culture-war from the study of artifacts of these kinds.  I've got hundreds, and I reckon I'll get hundreds more. 

It's harder to get the Russian ones.  They used to dominate.  But their sponsors in Saint Petersburg's meme-mills seem kinda preoccupied lately. 

https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/albums/72157645661977864     


## 177 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 23 02:13 



I think that civilians will indeed lose interest in a static trench war that's trying hard to become a locked-down Iron Curtain, but military professionals worldwide are truly, deeply interested in the Russo-Ukraine War. Everyone in uniform in every nation -- navy guys, air force guys, tank force people, artillery people, even military space-force people and the bifocalled cyberwar nerds -- they're super into every little nitpicky detail of this fight.  They've all got popcorn buckets big as oil tankers. 

Syria they ignore, they don't care much about endemic middle-eastern terror-war any more, but a land war in Europe, involving a massive army that was supposed to be very up-to-speed and is failing drastically in unexpected ways, they care plenty about that.  Also, they don't much care if  mere civilians care -- that's not necessary.  They care if the weapons-providers in the military-industrial complex care, and they care plenty -- everybody's tossing their old rusty guns into that maelstrom 'cause they're keen to build shiny new ones.     


## 178 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Tue 10 Jan 23 02:16 



Also, I'm impressed by the novelty of OSINT open-source intelligence nerds like Bellingcat and their ilk,w when it comes to the war in Ukraine.  They're not Henry Kissinger, they have next-to-zero understanding of geopolitics or military strategy, but every day they trawl methodically through satellite shots, and leaked databases, and indiscreet selfies that they can geolocate.  

 They're not "surveillance marketing'" people -- they're not selling ads, nobody pays 'em to do it -- but you never saw a civilian panopticon like that in the "fog of war" before.  Not that they know everything there is to know, or even know "useful" things, but they get these very weird, deep, orthogonal glimpses into realities of warfare that the combatants themselves know nothing about. 

I never saw anything like that.  I'll pay plenty of attention to OSINT zealots this year, though.  They're very 02023.     


## 179 of 332: Ixak23 (ixak23) Tue 10 Jan 23 05:13 

As someone who periodically has to conduct analysis of large blocks of qualitative data, the really useful potential I see for ChatGPT and its ilk is the opportunity for natural language queries within bounded sets of novel text. I’m less concerned about high school students using it to generate essays on Dostoevsky so they can get out of reading Crime and Punishment (though they will be missing out on the benefits gained from the linked actions of reading, thinking about what you’ve read, organizing your thoughts on what you’ve read into coherence, and writing those coherent thoughts down). What’s really happening in higher education is still mostly just a disruption of the ancient and esteemed cottage industry of bright college students selling ghost-written essays to their lazier well-heeled classmates. 

But to my initial point, when I got my first big break in the international development sector some 15 years ago, it was because a company needed someone to do qualitative data analysis (QDA) of more than 500 pages of conversations transcribed from 32 focus groups conducted with Pashtun tribespeople in Pakistan’s Federally Administrated Tribal Areas (FATA). Even with conventional computer assisted QDA, this was a grueling task that required multiple readings of the material, and extensive data cleaning and preparation to produce meaningful analysis in a systematic fashion. If I fed those 500 pages of data into Chat GPT today and started asking it the same questions I’d been asked about the information contained therein I’d be curious to know: 

(a.) How much cleaning is required to make sure that the AI is only analyzing the correct sections of the text?  

And more interestingly: 

(b.) Would it come to the same conclusions that I had? 

Answering both questions will require side-by-side comparison of systematic human-produced and AI-produced text analysis, something that I’m reasonably (hopefully) sure is happening in more than a few universities at this very moment. But unintended bias is the bane of every social scientist, whether they are working with quantitative methods, qualitative methods, or hybrid (aka “mixed”) methods. Mixed-methods do provide some hedge against some types of bias by requiring a triangulating compare/contrast of quant and qual findings, but this highlights a much more important issue: 

As algorithms become more and more deeply integrated into the legal, financial, social, and commercial fabric of day to day life there is a HUGE need for professional bias-hunters in the data realm. There are many people doing this work already in the justice sector, but not nearly enough. E.g. The recent case of a man identified by a police facial ID system for a case thousands of miles away in a state he’d never been to - just one of a growing litany of consequences that we’ve been watching over the past few years. ( https://apnews.com/article/technology-louisiana-baton-rouge-new-orleans-crime-50e1ea591aed6cf14d248096958dccc4 ). Law Enforcement agencies do not have to disclose when they use algorithms and facial recognition software to drive arrests, putting defense lawyers at a deep disadvantage. This must change. 

 Punitive legal action against these instances must be severe enough that instead of “move fast and break things (i.e. people)” the legal risk should motivate these companies to move carefully and do due diligence. Not just simple fines - we need meaningful threats that could lead to outright loss of actual proprietary ownership of these platforms. Of course that’s not happening, and these companies are still largely in the mode of “better to ask forgiveness than permission” - but that’s because asking forgiveness carries little in the way of consequences. There is big money being spent convincing law enforcement agencies and financial institutions that these AI/algorithm-driven tools are better, cheaper, faster, and more reliable than hiring actual people to do actual time and skill-intensive work, when they’ve really only got as much credibility as a ChatGPT generated freshman essay on Crime & Punishment that is agglomerated from everything the AI could locate on the topic. 

Perhaps as the hot money starts to dry up in SV, we’ll see the cautious money creep back in, but I’m not optimistic. We need to go on the attack. We must, in a systematic fashion, use lawyers, lawsuits, and tech-savvy social scientists to peel the algorithms apart and take the marketing shine off of what they are purported to be capable of. Put real people on the hook for the machines they’re setting loose on the world through punitive legal action.     


## 180 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 10 Jan 23 09:50 

wrt #176, lovely collection. in the earlier 2014 pix, there's a kitsch-o-rama painting of a leaderish guy on a white horse, and standing next to him appears to be a captive, in front of whom is someone kneeling, and behind the captive a person of darker skintone. 

whatever is this and when was it created?     


## 181 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 23 11:39 

Looking around in those photos, I found this: 

typewriter Poem by Ukrainian separatist rebel (from a YouTube video he did) 

We were told: "You are traitors, You've traded your freedom For a stale chunk of bread, Slave chains you happily don." 

Beaten, abused -- just for speaking our tongue. My sweet mother, they have called her "a whore." Our ancestors' faith, sacred gift solemnly kept -- They have trampled it under their dirty feet. 

Our children they made into strangers, Taught them to hate us, to disobey. Those of us who objected they burned -- Simply burned them like hay. 

Our victory day shall be your day of mourning My grandpa, my sole protector, Whom you have called a "bloody Mongol," My grandfather, flesh and blood of mine, Who, for you, was "Stalin's simpleton" -- If he were alive today, To kill, to impale him you'd dream? 

Don't you dream! We are finished with talking -- What you deserve aren't words but grenades: For my Mom, for my brother, For my war-hero grandfather. It's payback time, And so dearly you shall pay! 

Off with the dirt, We shall sweep our hut clean! Peace we wanted; Soldiers we became. Your satanic orgy is over -- We shall send you Back to your graves, to hell. 

<https://www.flickr.com/photos/brucesterling/14528889969/in/album-72157645661977864/>     


## 182 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Tue 10 Jan 23 11:39 

(That was dated 2014...)     


## 183 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Tue 10 Jan 23 12:44 

One reason the post 2/24/2022 poems in response to the new stage of war have been so very strong it that the writing of these responses goes back to 2014. Ukrainian poets were prepared and ready--and have created an exceptional body of work.  

Here's one example (title not given) by a Ukrainian poet whose works have become much visible here n the U.S. in the past year--from an anthology published in 2017: 

 LYUDMYLA KHERSONSKA: 

The whole soldier doesn’t suffer — it’s just the legs, the arms, just blowing snow, just meager rain. The whole soldier shrugs off hurt — it’s just missile systems “Hail” and “Beech,” just bullets on the wing, just happiness ahead. Just meteorological pogroms, geo-Herostratos wannabes, just the girl with the pointer poking the map in the stomach. Just thunder, lightning, just dreadful losses, just the day with a dented helmet, just God, who doesn’t protect. 

Translated from the Russian by Katherine E. Young 

One issue for Ukrainian poets has been whether or not to continue writing in Russian, if that was their first language. Most are bilingual.     


## 184 of 332: E. Sweeney (sweeney) Tue 10 Jan 23 14:20 

re <180> 

It's a painting on a Mongol victory over Russians. Battle on the River Kalka. Artist: Pavel Ryzhenko 

<https://www.historynet.com/mongols-on-the-march-the-logistics-of-grass/kalka-river-the-arrest-of-prince-mstislav-iii-of-kiev-museum-state-museum-centre-the-polotnyany-zavod-estate-kaluga-author-ryzhenko-pavel-viktorovich/>     


## 185 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Tue 10 Jan 23 15:04 

thanx for this. just searched on the painter, who is said to have been xian/monarchist/RU --- and born in 1970. sheesh! he even paints in a retrograde style.     


## 186 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 10 Jan 23 16:14 

Good points about OSINT in Ukraine. 

I think it's fine to ignore Ukraine most days. There's no moral imperative to doom scroll. It doesn't actually help, and there are often weeks between interesting news. There's a war mapper account I follow that posts daily, but usually it's "there have been no notable changes since the last update." 

This seems like a good time to discuss how the political climate changed after the war started. Example from 2018: 

Google to scrub U.S. military deal protested by employees <https://www.reuters.com/article/uk-alphabet-defense/google-to-scrub-u-s-military-deal-protested-by-employees-source-idUKKCN1IX5YC> 

> The defence programme, called Project Maven, set off a revolt inside Google, as factions of employees opposed Google technology being used in warfare. The dissidents said it clashed with the company’s stated principle of doing no harm and cited risks around using a nascent artificial intelligence technology in lethal situations. 

> Google plans to honour what is left of its contract on Project Maven, the person said. More than 4,600 employees signed a petition calling for Google to cancel the deal, with at least 13 employees resigning in recent weeks in protest at Google’s involvement, according to a second person familiar with the deal. 

I wonder how those tech industry protesters updated their beliefs this year. Are they gung-ho Ukraine supporters now? Do they have stickers? Do they donate to Ukrainian causes? Are they okay now with working for a defense contractor? 

> Through Project Maven, Google provides artificial intelligence technology to the Pentagon to help humans detect and identify targets captured by drone images. Company executives have defended the contract, saying its cloud computing and data analysis tools were being used for non-offensive tasks and would help save lives. 

Never mind the "saving lives" fig leaf. In 2022, how many people would protest a contract to apply AI to analyzing drone footage to better kill Russians? 

This year I stuck with my usual charity habit and donated via GiveWell to theoretically save a few lives in Africa using the power of bednets. I did wonder, though, if I should have helped a Ukrainian military engineer who was raising money to buy a used SUV. And if you're serious about supporting them, why stop there? Might as well help them buy guns and ammo.     


## 187 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 10 Jan 23 16:36 

Another change in 2022 was in attitudes towards nuclear power. In Japan, the post-Fukushima era is over; they've gone back to being pro-nuclear energy. I can't tell if Finland's new nuclear power plant is in "test production" or not, but hopefully it will be useful to avoid rolling outages. France's energy policy is looking better than Germany's these days. 

I don't expect we'd ever get more nuclear power in California, but the Diablo Canyon shutdown might be delayed?     


## 188 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 23 01:42 

*Here's some young European scientists complaining en masse that war and plague are driving people out of their minds, and they're just not gonna be able to make a steady scientific in such a situation. 

*At least they're not actually *in Ukraine and getting sick,* or at least, not all of them are. 

https://initiative-se.eu/manifesto/     


## 189 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 23 01:50 

Here's Microsoft making their ten-bllion-dollar play to "knife the baby and steal the oxygen" when it comes to ChatGPT and OpenAI. 

A complicated scheme, but it likely makes more sense than investing in non-fungible tokens for apes bored on their yachts. 

https://www.semafor.com/article/01/09/2023/microsoft-eyes-10-billion-bet-on-chatgpt  

"Bored Ape Yacht Club," what an incantation that was.  What's the least likely thing you could be during a plague, and land war, and a climate crisis?  An ape, on a yacht, bored.  Everyone in the "yacht club" knows one another, supposedly, so I wonder if they'll get around to hiring lawyers and trying to sue somebody for their losses in imaginary wealth and neat-o branding.     


## 190 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 23 02:03 

I like following Web3 development by periodically checking on on "Web3 Is Going Great," which consists entirely of catastrophic Web3 news snippets, tastefully arranged. 

You have to wonder if maybe every human endeavor should have an "is going great" site.  Even the most harmless and arcane human activities, like, say, underwater basket-weaving, probably have a lot unsung major debacles that insiders just don't wanna talk about. 

https://web3isgoinggreat.com/     


## 191 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 23 02:15 

Speaking of underwater basket-weaving, and to add a note of light relief to a remarkably bleak WELL State of the World, here's some YouTube stars weaving underwater baskets.  I find this hugely entertaining, mostly because it just doesn't fit into any previous popular-media niche.  What the heck are they "doing"?  They're a Texan married couple who are always smiling and fooling around with surreal gadgets while engaging in unscripted in-joke banter.  Other than that, it's indescribable. 

Does it really make any sense to sink thousands of dollars in off the wall equipment purchases in order to entertain YouTubers with this kind of Rube Goldberg performance art?  Apparently it does, because they do it every week.  

 I'm not sure if this form of "makertainment" is a niche with a future, or just the kind of daffy shenanigans that Bruce Sterling really likes.  My wife -- a woman fully inured to fab-labs and maker-spaces -- finds them nerve-racking. 

https://youtube.com/watch?v=yr1E3NUhDio&si=EnSIkaIECMiOmarE     


## 192 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Wed 11 Jan 23 02:25 



"Those kids these days and their nutty digital music, get off my lawn!" etc. 

https://www.nme.com/blogs/nme-radar/the-nme-100-essential-emerging-artists-for-2023-radar-3372061 

https://mixmag.net/feature/top-24-artists-djs-producers-rappers-check-out-watch-2023     


## 193 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 23 06:27 

Just randomly looking at that NME list, I already found a winner, Alice Longyu Gao: <https://youtu.be/tu52D9RplSE> 

We're constantly streaming music from all over the place. Marsha prefers classic rock, but I explore. Watching streaming festivals, mainly Lollapalooza, boosted my interest in DJs and EDM. One in particular that we both like: LP Giobbi, who we just discovered is from Austin, but we discovered her through a Lollapalooza set. She has a lot of videos on YouTube: <https://www.youtube.com/@LPGiobbi> - probably the best way to get into her music. Recently on one of those videos, she introduced Sofi Tukker, a duo that sparked our interest: <https://www.youtube.com/@SOFITUKKER> Sofi and Tukker have some pretty trippy videos along with their live concert videos. 

I listen to jazz quite a lot. Austin's Pedro Moreno's been bringing cutting edge free jazz performers to Austin for two decades or more, via Epistrophy Arts. Norwegian bassist Ingebrigt Haker Flaten lived in Austin for a while and produced an annual event called Sonic Transmissions featuring an eclectic blend of new and adventurous music. He returned to Norway during the Covid epidemic - a real loss for Austin. Pedro and Ingebrigt together were creating an amazing scene, given Austin's allergy to jazz in general. 

Contemporary pop of the kind that you see on something like the Grammy awards show can be dense, complex, and somewhat interesting if you lean into it. And visual: music's not enough, these days they create visual environments that they can transport from festival to festival.  And post-Covid, the festivals are packed and there's a real surge in creative stagecraft, from what we've seen via streaming (we don't actually go to those festivals anymore, or anywhere we have to stand for hours, bouncing).     


## 194 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 23 06:47 

Meanwhile on the last day of this conversation I'll be MIA - under the surgeon's knife, acquiring a metal/plastic hip replacement. When I mention this in any crowd, there's always a few people who've also had the procedure, or who know someone who had it. I wonder if anyone's keeping count?  

"According to the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, more than 450,000 total hip replacements are performed each year in the United States." <https://orthoinfo.aaos.org/en/treatment/total-hip-replacement/> 

It's routine surgery these days. In fact, as I grow older I stumble over all sorts of remedies that didn't exist a few decades ago. I hear many complaints about healthcare, but the real state of the world is that we have amazing healthcare systems and protocols, an evolving sense of the patient's role as more than an object in the healthcare environment, and (arguably) better access to health insurance. 

I'm a participatory medicine advocate, and a cofounder of the Society for Participatory Medicine: <https://participatorymedicine.org/> "The Society of Participatory Medicine thinks differently about solutions. We think medicine is best practiced as a collaboration between Patients/Family/Caregivers and Clinicians." A patient movement was already emerging as we started the Society and an associated journal. Over the years we've seen a mainstreaming of participatory thinking - which started with the late Dr. Tom Ferguson, who among many other things was a contributor to the Whole Earth Catalog, as an advocate for medical self-help. His final work was in creating a white paper called "e-Patients: How they can help us heal healthcare." <https://participatorymedicine.org/e-patients-white-paper/> 

For all the issues with "the healthcare mess" and the evils of "big pharma," medical knowledge continues to evolve, advance, and improve.     


## 195 of 332: E. Sweeney (sweeney) Wed 11 Jan 23 08:01 

Beams for a successful procedure and smooth speedy recovery, Jon.     


## 196 of 332: Ari Davidow (ari) Wed 11 Jan 23 09:38 

And beams for us all, around the planet, to have similar access to these modern advances.     


## 197 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 23 10:00 

<196> amen to that.     


## 198 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Wed 11 Jan 23 10:12 

and another whole-hearted amen from here, and all wishes your own surgery and recovery go seamlessly well (well, a tiny seam may be left, neatly sutured), 

plus appreciation for the multi-dimensional expansion of where and what is being looked at in this latest burst of posts.     


## 199 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 23 10:55 

Talk of AI is all the rage, but what about cyborgs? 

At Sandy's site, I found a link to an interview Paco Nathan, David Demaris and I did with her for Mondo 2000: <https://sandystone.com/pupik/Mondo-interview> 

"in cyborg technology the boundary between you and the machine disappears. It becomes a true prosthetic, which is to say, an invisible, impalpable and unconscious extension of your own agency, where you no longer struggle with the keyboard, and you no longer think about this barrier between you and what it is that's going on. It becomes part of your presence, and that's what ubiquity is all about. It becomes invisible by changing shape, not being a box on the desk any more, just the way mainframes stopped being big things, and shrank to the size of a box on the desk. That took many many years...IBM only saw the writing on the wall this year! Now we've still got the little boxes to contend with, but some people, very fortunately, are getting beyond the box to the hand held computer, and shortly they'll go beyond the handheld computer to the wearable computer, and beyond the wearable computer to the ubiquitous or cyborg computer. And of course that's not a computer at all, any more. It's something new."       


## 200 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Wed 11 Jan 23 11:08 

> wishes your own surgery and recovery go seamlessly well 

I had some anxiety about it, but since there are apparently 450,000 hip replacements a year in the US alone, and having found so many others who've been through it, it's starting to feel more like getting a root canal than major surgery!      


## 201 of 332: David Gans (tnf) Wed 11 Jan 23 14:16 

I  hope it is a smooth and painless event!     


## 202 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Wed 11 Jan 23 17:45 

China, anyone ? 

On my watch list, for instance, Tiktok = national security threat ? 

Or, Fentenyl = retaliation for the Opium War ? 

Then there's China's economic warfare against the USAmerica – more of a threat than, say, Russia's ( petroyuan -vs- petrodollar, for instance ) 

Next, Taiwan …  

    


## 203 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Wed 11 Jan 23 18:35 

Jon – The state of your hip & the state of the world are not two separate things. I join the WHBC (Wellperns' Healing Beams Coalition) in wishing your procedure every success & your recovery a whole healing     


## 204 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 11 Jan 23 18:41 

Good luck, Jon!     


## 205 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 11 Jan 23 22:30 

 <scribbled by yesway Wed 11 Jan 23 22:32>     


## 206 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 11 Jan 23 22:32 

So as not to be strictly doom and gloomy about the prospects of rewilding, I want to share this video of Douglas Tallamy(produced by the Sonoma Land Trust). Tallamy is an author and activist/naturalist. 

<https://www.timberpress.com/authors/douglas-w-tallamy> 

<https://homegrownnationalpark.org/tallamys-hub-1> 

The video is a 1 1/2 hour presentation of the concept of acting on E. O. Wilson's assertion that we need to set aside half of the Earth for Nature. 

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qstt3davwWs> 

You may have to wait for an ad to evaporate(30-40 seconds)  

I think it's worth a look. One of the few things that helps me sleep is the fact that my granddaughter(12) has been swooped and shaded by Condors at the Kern County ranch I grew up on. That effort to bring back a species(people?) from the brink of human engendered extinction gives me confidence that humans can get their heads on straight about what's required. So does the work of Wes Jackson, Amory Lovins, David Philips, and Allan Savory.   

Leopold, Wilson, Brower. These are historic figures too. Long term thinkers, like Brand. Politics and technology are tools. We need to use them to address real problems. We need to make restoring the planet a rallying cause. More Greta. Less Meta.       


## 207 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 11 Jan 23 22:33 

205 Scribbled for correction     


## 208 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Wed 11 Jan 23 23:20 

Here’s to smooth surgery and swift healing, <jonl>. FWIW, word is that <doctorow> just had both hips done and is back out on tour. 

Hot takes on topics recently raised: 

- TikTok’s reported threat to national security is rivaled by the brutal reprogramming job it does to users’ dopamine/cortisol circuitry and attention spans, IMHO. As a result, Eyal Nir’s seminal neural receptor-programming manual for product design, “Hooked” (https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=&ved=2ahUKEwjf2qfls8H8AhWDjYkEHVoUAocQFnoECCEQAQ&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.com%2FHooked-How-Build-Habit-Forming-Products%2Fdp%2F1591847788&usg=AOvVaw2H9ckSP3GlkpRkQBcPCHYN) winds up looking like the punchline in the “To Serve Man” episode of The Twilight Zone -> “IT’S A *COOKBOOK*!!!” 

- Cyborgs - Elon Musk’s vaunted Neuralink startup is either about to start human trials after successful animal trials, or it’s under investigation for torturing monkeys to death. Depends on what you read!  https://www.google.com/search?q=neuralink+torture https://www.google.com/search?q=neuralink+human+trials+2022 

- The war in Ukraine does seem to have congealed into near-archetypal stasis between an immoral, ill-advised, brute-force megalomaniac with a rotting army of press-ganged, poorly-equipped and increasingly amateur soldiers and the stalwart and globally-popular victim-state that is winning hearts and minds with eye-watering resolve and winning battles with all the most powerful non-nuclear weaponry its hands-off allies can get away with delivering … if you can accurately call the horrific body count on both sides and obliteration of Ukraine “stasis.” Wishing for an end won’t bring either side to the actual end game. What happens when Putin finally succumbs to his illnesses, court skullduggery or internal rebellion? Do his successors just banging away? 

- And Satya Nadella is deciding how many zeros to tack onto MSFT’s already multibillion-dollar bid for Open AI and ChatGPT. Plugging that thing into the world’s business-operating system (and, by extension, its business practices and corporate culture) will Change Shit Forever in ways that none of us can accurately anticipate.  

https://www.google.com/search?q=microsoft+and+open+ai&source=lnms&tbm=nws 

Picture Clippy on meth. Multiply it by a googol. Now give it to corporate hierarchies that range from Fortune 100 manufacturers, banks, and monopolies down to comically dysfunctional corporate barnacles that make “Office Space” look like a documentary.  

Good times are ahead! 

(Slipped by <yesway> whose post prompts me to recommend the inspiring work of Marc Buckley, a guy I worked with last year. His “Inside Ideas” podcast interviews some of the smartest thinkers on the forces currently putting humanity out of - and back into - balance with nature: https://www.youtube.com/MarcBuckleyEarth)     


## 209 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:51 

Followup to Shanta Stevens' long previous contribution - this one also segmented as multiple posts. 

*** Regarding the extreme epidemic of Opioid Use Disorders in the US & elsewhere... Ironically, there are "psychedelic" & "oneirophrenic" medicines that have shown some utility in treating Opioid Use Disorders... particularly, ibogaine & psilocybin have shown the most promise in this regard (there are also indications in some but not all studies regarding LSD, DMT/Ayahuasca, Ketamine & others that could possibly also be used similarly) <https://universalibogaine.com/ibogaine/> <https://www.journalofsubstanceabusetreatment.com/article/S0740-5472(21)00443-8/fulltext> <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36263479/> <https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0269881114552713> <https://www.iceers.org/first-ever-clinical-trial-with-ibogaine-for-opioid-dependency/> <https://www.clinicaltrialsarena.com/news/ibogaine-demerx-atai-mhra-clinical-trial/> <https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-08085-4> 

However, looking for a medicine to provide the cure in of itself is actually a large part of the Western problem... and this blind spot may be part of the root cause that has led so many people in the US towards this epidemic crisis of opioid use disorders... although a medicine may be able to provide an interrupt for a cycle of abuse... it is the integration practices before, during & after such a session that can provide context for what is likely be an extremely unfamiliar experience for most people... that context integration can really make a profound difference in people's lives and determine whether or not they actually find healing... 

Psychedelic integration: An analysis of the concept and its practice <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9386447/> 

One of the original pioneers of Ibogaine as a treatment for substance use disorders was Howard Lotsof, who championed the cause from the day when it cured him of a heroin addiction in 1962 until his death in 2010 (at the age of 66, from liver cancer)... consider this perspective from 1996: <https://web.archive.org/web/20110112210601/http://www.ibogaine.desk.nl/ibogaine_trauma.html> 

"Ibogaine appears to offer a unique tool to both the patient and the clinician to allow the elimination of physical withdrawal characteristics and the accessing of repressed memories in a non threatening manner by which the majority of patients can gain an understanding of the trauma underlying their chemical dependence and to achieve accomplishments necessary to give them a sense of self worth without which it would be more difficult to break the cycle of substance use disorders. Most important, for many of the patients, Ibogaine allowed them to understand the benefit and role required of a psychosocial support structure including medical professionals, counselors, self-help organizations and the ability to tap into their own inner strength to allow normalization into and survival in a prohibitionist society."     


## 210 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:52 

_Why Ibogaine Is Not the Answer to the Opioid Crisis_ <https://chacruna.net/ibogaine-opioid-crisis/> 

"Ibogaine clearly illustrates the error behind the implicit goal of the so-called psychedelic renaissance, which is to mainstream these therapies. If the idea is that we simply place ibogaine into the nightmare of the American treatment industry and its predatory capitalism, it would be an attempt to try to resuscitate an industry that is proven to be ineffective, cruel, and capricious. 

What makes ibogaine a bad fit in the treatment industry is also its biggest advantage: the expansiveness of time. The experience just takes so long. In Gabon, the centuries-old consumption of iboga (the plant source of ibogaine) has given rise to the elaborate, rich, and varied spiritual practice known as Bwiti. In both of our travels and participation in this tradition, we have experienced a deep honoring of the individual, intensive care, and extensive time given by the entire community. 

This is not a call to use Bwiti as drug treatment or for any other purpose removed from its traditional intent in Gabon, but simply points to its artistic and vigorous celebration of that expansiveness of time. It is just an example of what emerges when released from the constraints of efficacy in terms of time, expense, and result. This type of co-created celebration, play, spiritual technology, and performance art as healing art, could be one of those expressions that replaces treatment. It should be treated with that kind of reverence because ibogaine is a big deal, and so are human beings."     


## 211 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:52 

Meanwhile, as I pointed out in my previous post, the pharmaceutical side of the psychedelic medical industry will continue to attempt to produce research chemicals which they will pitch as the magic bullet to kill everyone's demons, and people will continue to line up for the off chance that they are able to find the desired effect! Please pardon my extreme skepticism, for I dearly want people to be well. I must admit that in my understanding of the copious evidence: the cure will still require work by not only the individuals, but also their families, communities, governments & other institutions becoming more life-affirming, in general. I do love the way of life practiced by the Bwiti, but not everyone is fortunate enough to be familiar with how to participate in such communities built around, "self-empowering mutual aid!" Obviously, each of us only really has control over our own selves, so that's a great place to start... & perhaps we can build coalition strength after each of us has improved our own personal foundations?     


## 212 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:53 

FWIW, the scientists who are synthesizing these non-psychedelic research chemicals derived from psychedelics, in the belief that they will produce favorable results are not necessarily wrong...  <https://www.forbes.com/sites/willyakowicz/2021/12/07/us-government-will-test-ibogaine-as-an-addiction-treatment/> 

"The reason psychedelic drugs have been found to alleviate symptoms of depression and PTSD in clinical trials, it is thought, is due to signaling of the 5-HT-2A receptor, which sparks what's called neuroplasticity. Neuroplasticity helps the brain form new neural connections, which is believed to generate rapid and sustained positive mood effects. In studies, psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy has provided almost immediate reductions in depressive symptoms after a single high dose and antidepressant effects that last as long as six months in some participants. 

Olson says that the root of many neuropsychiatric conditions, including addiction, is the atrophy of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. But drugs that trigger neuroplasticity are like Miracle-Gro, helping the brain rewire healthy neural pathways." 

Cameron, L.P., Tombari, R.J., Lu, J. et al. A non-hallucinogenic psychedelic analogue with therapeutic potential. Nature 589, 474--479 (2021).  <https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pp1d1vm>     


## 213 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:53 

But not only do our brains need better fertilizer, they also benefit from permacultural environments and to be tended with care by ourselves & others. Meanwhile, not everyone has access to such treatments with sacred entheogens (even if they are available in your area, they may currently be cost prohibitive); and even if you can't find a Bwiti temple in your neighborhood, you can still nurture your own growth through some form of "self-empowering mutual aid!" Not everyone is familiar with what that looks like, unless they have been through an experience of emergency management &/or disaster relief. But perhaps that's a good place for us to start? It even worked in Texas during the Snowpocalypse of 2021! <https://www.texastribune.org/2021/02/23/mutual-aid-texas-storm/> <https://grist.org/justice/solidarity-not-charity-mutual-aid-groups-are-filling-gaps-in-texas-crisis-response/> <https://www.shareable.net/podcasts/fire-and-water-mutual-aid-in-the-aftermath-of-the-texas-freeze/> 

We don't have to wait for a national disaster to engage in such activities of "self-empowering mutual aid!" For some people it involves creating music & art & dance. For other people, it may be community gardening or a wilderness survival adventure group. Certain people may prefer to study martial arts, learn a meditative tradition, perhaps even attend religious ceremonies, or otherwise engage in spiritual practices with others in their community. Many people benefit from team sports or other competitive play, while some prefer cooperative skill-sharing or charitable volunteer projects. There are many other specific therapeutic forms useful for recovery listed in the article I highlighted above concerning psychedelic integration. Part of the point that I am leaning into is that healing the individual is extremely difficult within a sick society. And there is a long tradition of promoting "victim self-correction as a panacea" throughout human history. However, I have also seen glimmers of hope that humans are able to evolve beyond the horrors of the Anthropocene towards something that some people have started calling the Symbiocene... and although this transition will also certainly still pose many challenges... I believe we can strategically align our forces towards the production of mutually beneficial results!  

_Exiting the Anthropocene and Entering the Symbiocene,_ by Glenn Albrecht & Gavin Van Horn <https://humansandnature.org/exiting-the-anthropocene-and-entering-the-symbiocene/> 

"E.O. Wilson, and before him, Erich Fromm, gave us the concept of 'biophilia' as something to hope for in human nature. Our instinctual love of life and life-like forms would/could prevail over necrophilia and possible ecocide. However, although "bio" means life, it is often seen in the context of a reductionist science that pulls things apart and isolates particularities. I now offer 'sumbiophilia' (the love of living together) as an addition to biophilia. Since we evolved within a pre-existing ecological matrix as an intensely social species and lived in relative harmony with all other life forms, sumbiophilia must also be deeply ingrained within us. If I am correct, then exiting the Anthropocene and entering the Symbiocene, will be a satisfying experience for most humans. As the politics of sumbiocracy play out and we live by symbiomimicry in all our technologies and habitats, the Earth will breathe a huge sigh of relief."     


## 214 of 332: Shanta Stevens (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 05:54 

Furthermore, I believe that this echoes the references I made in my previous post to the work of Bruce Damer (& David Deamer, et alia)... <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/341641546_The_Hot_Spring_Hypothesis_for_the_Origin_of_Life_and_the_Extended_Evolutionary_Synthesis> 

"The hot spring hypothesis scenario and empirical evidence behind it... suggests how evolution originated and predicts the nature of the first evolving chemical systems and their path to living cellular communities. This path begins with a primordial form of niche construction, adds a network effect, adaptation through distribution across a landscape, and a resulting stepwise evolution of polymer systems which ultimately combine to support the transition into the first living cellular communities. The meta-system which enables this process is the aggregation of simpler individuals, sharing of resources across aggregations, and growth and evolution at the level of the aggregation to drive increasingly robust innovations within the individuals. After rise of living cellular forms within these aggregations they remain dependent and indivisible from their surrounding microbial communities. Evolutionary theory has historically rested heavily on the study of animals, interpreting their behavior as individuals competing "red in tooth and claw" to pass on their genes. Yet from its origin and for most of its evolutionary history, life has been dominated by niche construction and networks of resource sharing between collaborating organisms, primarily microbial consortia. Animals are completely dependent on grazing on the products of these consortia to act out the drama of their lives. It therefore behooves science to consider that perhaps life, and evolution itself, actually rests on a platform more broadly based on niches and collaborative networks than the strict competition between individuals struggling to pass on their genetic lines."     


## 215 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Thu 12 Jan 23 07:52 

World Economic Forum ranking future risks for MMXXIII.  It's pretty much all climate (and its secondary effects), all the time, for as far as the eye can see. 

https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_Report_2023.pdf     


## 216 of 332: Michael Bravo (jonl) Thu 12 Jan 23 09:43 

Via email from Michael Bravo: 

Seeing all that poetry on the war, here's a link to an anthology you all might appreciate and possibly haven't heard about - it's called ROAR, for somewhat unwieldy Russian Opposition Arts Review, is now in the fifth issue and has been started shortly after the war began. Link to the current issue is <https://roar-review.com/ROAR-Fifth-Issue-d0cb719ab6af43808cc914809a207483>; prior issues can be found under Archive (mix of languages). It's being edited and produced by an international team of volunteers, so forgive some haphazardness.     


## 217 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 12 Jan 23 12:11 

Thanks for that last link-- the first entry I read in it is pretty interesting, though I only saw the translator's name, not the author's. 

I would (how shameless it somehow feels to even have an opinion) agree with about the climate crisis being THE crisis--except that it will remain insoluble without addressing the many other crises of division, inequality, got-mine-ism, and human short-sightedness. For me, yes, the biosphere's continuance is the fundamental ground. But we got here because of all the rest of our human frailties and run-amok talents, and to change those dynamics of what humans value and do is as necessary to a solution as any miracle of engineering or alternative power-production.      


## 218 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 12 Jan 23 13:15 

Another 2022 trend: it seems clearer now that globalization of trade has peaked. There's serious, ongoing effort to partially undo it. 

Most obviously with Russia. Europe was unprepared for this, but it looks like they're doing fine for now, thanks to winter not being on Russia's side: 

The energy crisis and Europe’s astonishing luck <https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2023/01/11/the-energy-crisis-and-europes-astonishing-luck> <https://archive.ph/FaZYK> 

> A warm autumn postponed the heating season, allowing gas-storage facilities to be filled to the brim. The present warmth has enabled them to be topped up again (see chart)—a startling turn in the middle of winter. All told, Europe has sucked out half as much gas from storage facilities as at this point in the past two winters. And forecasts suggest a mild end to winter. 

> The good weather is not the only reason for cheer. Gas supply is growing as new liquefied-natural-gas terminals begin work. A wet autumn and windy winter have helped propel hydro and wind generators. French nuclear plants, turned off for maintenance, are slowly returning to the grid. “The stressors that caused the energy crisis of 2022 are all relaxing at the same time,” notes Lion Hirth of the Hertie School in Berlin. Power prices in Europe have fallen back to levels last seen before the summer. 

Meanwhile, the Biden administration is continuing and expanding the Trump administration's efforts to put up trade barriers with China. Though, in a more intelligent way? 

Biden reverses decades of Chinese trade policy <https://www.politico.com/news/2022/12/26/china-trade-tech-00072232> 

> The new strategy, which the Biden administration internally calls its “protect agenda,” is being rolled out this fall and winter in a series of executive actions. In October, the Commerce Department issued new rules aimed at cutting off Chinese firms’ ability to manufacture advanced computer chips. They will soon be followed by an executive order creating new federal authority to regulate U.S. investments in China — the first time the federal government will exert such power over American industry – and an executive order to limit the ability of Chinese apps like TikTok to collect data from Americans. 

> Congress is participating as well, drafting its own, bipartisan versions of Chinese investment screening, potential rules on American capital flows into China, and restrictions on TikTok and other apps that hawks hope can be passed next Congress. 

Apple will reportedly begin producing some MacBooks in Vietnam in 2023 as it shifts from China <https://www.cnbc.com/2022/12/20/apple-will-reportedly-begin-producing-some-macbooks-in-vietnam-in-2023.html> 

It's far from a full separation. Container ships full of Chinese goods keep crossing the Pacific, and the COVID lockdowns in China showed that we'd be unprepared if there were reason for them to stop.     


## 219 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 12 Jan 23 13:27 

The world splitting into regional trading blocks would be an enormous change, and yet even that would be very far from the full decentralization that we romantically imagine sometimes. I think of it as sort of like camping. Sure, you might (with proper preparation) manage to physically disconnect for a while, but it's only until supplies run out, or you need a doctor or something. 

It's sunny today here in California, but it looks like we're going to disconnect from Monterey for a bit: 

Monterey County Storm Update (January 12): Salinas River flood watch <https://www.ksbw.com/article/monterey-county-storm-update-january-12-salinas-river-flood-watch/42475828> 

> In a press conference on Wednesday, Sheriff Tina Nieto announced that the county is preparing for the Monterey Peninsula be cut off from the rest of the state due to on-coming flood waters if the Salinas River continues to flood. 

> The Salinas River goes under Highway 68 and Highway 1 on its way to the Monterey Bay. During extreme flooding, the river can block people from moving on or off the peninsula by blocking both highways. This last happened in 1995.     


## 220 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 12 Jan 23 19:33 

CNET Has Been Quietly Publishing AI-Written Articles for Months <https://gizmodo.com/cnet-chatgpt-ai-articles-publish-for-months-1849976921> 

You can read them here: <https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Acnet.com> this article was generated using automation technology and thoroughly edited"> 

They seem to be generic consumer finance help articles. Going after Investopedia's traffic, maybe? 

Much like with me-too lyrics websites, such things can sometimes be useful (though unreliable), but the reference article market will probably get saturated pretty quick, and then Google starts doing it themselves.     


## 221 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Thu 12 Jan 23 21:31 

Well, a fair amount of the journalism coming out of such publications might as well have been written by bots even when it (presumably) wasn't.     


## 222 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 02:58 

I feel the need for some handwavey futurist prediction, in a general summary of what 02023 will look and feel like. 

Mostly, quite like the other years of this decade.  There will be some surprises, but they won't be unusual upsides. Likely they'll be "pink flamingo" surprises that blindside stakeholders who have agreed not to talk about what's actually going on.  "Gray rhinos," you know they're coming, they stomp you anyway.  That''ll be us.     


## 223 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 02:58 

Covid plague, continuing steadily worldwide, many casualties.  Some upsurges of very old pandemics due to antivax sentiment. 

Weather: quite bad, predictably worse, very expensive, lots of damage in unexpected places and also the expected ones.  The trend is repeat disasters in places already messed-up that were attempting "recovery." 

Inflation, quite high, because you can't deglobalize and carry out supply chain trade wars without paying for that. 

A "recession," whatever that means.     


## 224 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 02:59 



USA, crazytown in Congress, mostly social-media theatrics.  Also, fake news, just phony stuff for the clicks, lulz and grifts.  The increasingly customary gun-massacres.  Also, overdoses.  A distinct lack of "greatness again" especially if you're into greatness-again. 

Britain, continuing to decline from the bad decision of Brexitania, continuing to lie to themselves about what they've done to themselves. 

Ukraine-Russia, I think there's more chance for a sudden de-facto cease-fire than people want to imagine here. I wouldn't say that I'm "optimistic" about the war stopping; it's just that endlessly shelling trenches with no major movement on the ground doesn't make much strategic or economic sense for either side.  They'd both do a lot better worldwide with spy intrigue and culture war, they're just not very good militarily.  They don't want to admit that, but maybe somebody like Turkey could trick them into some face-saving cease-fire scheme. 

Iran, Venezuela, Ethiopia, Syria, already plenty bad places, continuing plenty bad because nobody's addressing their  problems. If your own problems spiral out of control and you hit the bottom of the misery-barrel nowadays, this is what you're life is gonna look like. You don't *die in a dramatic apocalypse* from it, you're just miserable, like they are, but with your local characteristics.  Also, nobody in deglobalized ethnonationalism cares or wants to help you, or has any faith that you can improve or reform or normalize, so you most likely won't.     


## 225 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 03:00 

Afghanistan, continuing to heroically defeat every military superpower and being worse-off for it.  They're truly amazing.  Why are there so many of them?  They're their own worst enemy.  The world is becoming more like them than they're becoming like anybody else.  They're our Taliban avant-garde. Presumably the Chinese will attempt to conquer them after a few years.  Everyone seems to feel the need to try that and fail at it. 

China: probably preoccupied with a massive epidemic.  Would likely prefer to profit from a European war than start a new Asian one this year.  Made too many enemies too fast, so we might see a charm offensive.  Trade war intensifies, but not embargos across the board all at once. 

Brazil: paralytic government by elderly liberals who used to be dynamic innovators way-back-when. 

India, continuing to disappoint, lots of internal ethnonational strutting nonsense that gains them nothing.  There will be more of them than anybody else in any single country, though, so that's something. 

There are usually some small bellwether states that are dynamic because of innovative policies and scale issues.  Qatar, Estonia, Singapore.  I frankly don't see a lot going on there in 02023.  They seem stymied.     


## 226 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 03:01 



Islamic terror, very cruel and bloody, lots of it all over the map, nobody cares much.  They could knock down signature buildings now, nobody's gonna go out in a candle-lit vigil.  "Thoughts and prayers" for a week, maybe.  They can do their worst, so what. 

Europe: quietly committee-working its way toward a continental military-industrial empire.  They have the ulcer of Britain and the bloody wound of Ukraine to motivate them.  It's interesting to hang out in a place like Ibiza and watch European infrastructure money literally buckling the pavements and piling up huge modern sewer pipes.  They do bicker in Europe, but they bicker much less when they're angry.  Also, every Eurocrat agenda is jam-packed and all the top guys -- a lot of them women -- are ceaselessly talking deliverables.  They're not whiling away their languid hours with language-correctness quibbles.  Birth rates might even go up.  If that somehow happened I'd sit up straight in my chair about Europe.     


## 227 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 03:02 



Big Tech, in financial and technical decline across the board.  "Detroit syndrome."  It's hard to arouse raw enthusiasm for anything "digital," because that high-concept is passe, it's become like "electric," "atomic," "automatic" or "space age."  I'm a very "cyber" guy personally and I truly enjoy the industry's antics, but I always knew there would be a day when "cyber" became cranky and old-fashioned tech -- especially when adults came on to the scene who had never known anything else.  

 Generative AI is quite interesting technically, it's probably less of a big-deal than its zealots imagine.  Also, "digital" has been over-extended into areas that are probably counter-productive -- for instance, if Facebook ceased to exist, no one would mourn it.  Alexa leaves the home, nobody notices.  These examples could be multiplied. 

This is the course of history, there's not a lot of point in weeping in the WELL 'Lectronic beer about this.  Something else will turn up.  I don't know what it is yet, but, "when you can't imagine how things will change, things change in ways that are unimaginable."  

 I'm old enough now that, in retrospect, I can understand that most of the things that really pleased me were things that I  didn't imagine and I couldn't foresee. You don't need to be anxious about the inherent uncertainty of life; the future is unwritten, trend isn't destiny. You need a certain open-field looseness in the spine-ankles-and-kneecaps there.  It's how to live.  It's fun, even.     


## 228 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Fri 13 Jan 23 03:04 



In summary, 02023 will be much like '20, '21, '22 and '23.  02024, will also probably be much like this year.  It's like a signature period flavor  of elderly stodginess with material disaster and poorly-handled emergency.  Somewhere on the far side of this is a quite strange society, without a "Republican Establishment," without consumerism, shopping malls, maybe without a middle class or a rule of law, very little regard for Judaeo-Christian ethics or organized churches, indifferent to sobriety and to prurient sex scandal -- much beset with environmental ruination, but not at all *dead,* just really messy, strange and different.  I'm not an enthusiast or booster for it, I can just kinda smell it.  It's not here yet, though.  

 In retrospect this period will be understood as an Indian summer of the old world, a winter that didn't know it was a transformative winter because it felt too warm.     


## 229 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Fri 13 Jan 23 06:23 

Wow. 

Maybe there's a signal in the current Musky odor coming from Twitter, and all the defections to various platforms, mostly Mastodon, which is decentralized and has the scent of a democratic co-operative endeavor. I suppose it could change, in the way things change when they feel like opportunity, but Mastodon founder Eugen Rochko doesn't appear ready to exploit the system's current popularity in order to line his pockets. I think he sees the filthy part of "filthy rich."  

Moving to Mastodon, I can see people that I know, and the posts I'm seeing are the sort of posts I was seeing on early social media, when it was mostly just the early adopters hanging out making good conversation, before spam, celebrity and toxic politics were added to the mix. We'll see if that's sustainable. The WELL is pretty much the same community after over 3.5 decades, and there's a comfort in seeing that persistence. 

The storms are coming, how resilient is the human race, to weather the worst of it? Many species are disappearing during the Anthropocene, maybe the human race will join them. But I know better than to place any bets, one way or another. 

We've been seeing a dangerous trend toward authoritarian leadership in various parts of the globe, including and especially the USA, where an unhinged former game show host has become a real political force - if you'd written a science fiction novel with that premise, I'm sure I would have relegated it to an unread stack and forgot about it.  

But... when the crass and the crazies put their hands on the levers of power and start manipulating things, their manipulations become more transparent, and cooler heads rebel. At least I think that's what happens. I can't imagine that any human majority has collectively lost its mind - sooner or later there'll be a catalyst for yet another course change. If we do recover from the lunacy of this long moment, and right the course of the ship before it smashes into the rocks, we might be okay for a while... until some later wave of crazy is unleashed. 

At the moment, the best strategy might be to stream "Emily in Paris" in UHD HDR and Dolby Atmos surround sound, and appreciate the luxurious high fashion fantasy, as the temperature ascends.     


## 230 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Fri 13 Jan 23 07:21 

    


## 231 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Fri 13 Jan 23 10:01 

"Indian summer of the old world" seems to this intuitive non-futurist a likely apt and quite evocatively beautiful description of our current era... 

(a phrase I realized as I typed it whose use is probably no longer smiled upon here in the U.S.)     


## 232 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Fri 13 Jan 23 10:11    


## 233 of 332: power meower (autumn) Fri 13 Jan 23 10:55 


## 234 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Fri 13 Jan 23 12:38 


## 235 of 332: Alex Davie (icenine) Sat 14 Jan 23 03:50     


## 236 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 23 07:46 

I just ran across a piece called "The Cyborganic Path," something I wrote in 1997 for CMC Magazine. I barely remember writing it. It reminds me how things change and how things don't change. 

"Look at the origin of cyberpunk, an aesthetic source of cyborganic vision: William Gibson's Neuromancer trilogy (plus The Difference Engine, a fourth book authored with Bruce Sterling), a transitional set of works between earlier science or speculative fiction and the cyberpunk sub-genre, posits the evolution of consciousness within a computer network toward a godlike transcendent being within which minor spirits (loas) reside. Gibson has constructed a mythopoetic representation of a search for significance in technological transcendence, one approach to a cyborganic spiritualism: a literal deus ex machina. Though Gibson's vision may not represent a plausible future, he has articulated in the cyborganic context the expectation that a supreme being (or beingness), a transcendence, exists as an evolutionary goal, where evolution involves silicon-based extension of human spiritual "form." 

"Though there is no prevailing net-based spiritual vision or belief, and though the global interactive character of the net reinforces the postmodern depreciation of particular belief systems, the sense of an evolving global consciousness a la Teilhard still emerges as a persistent thread within cybercultural discourse. Teilhard proposed noosphere as transbiological evolutionary goal, an inherent final step coextensive with the Omega point, the end run of collective salvation, (a rapture sort of gig, but not unlike the vision within Arthur C. Clarke's 2001/Childhood's End shaggy-apocalypse stories). At some point we all sort of merge, humming one note or hummed as one note, ingested by Nirvana and regurgitated as Enlightened Unity." 

<https://johndecember.com/cmc/mag/1997/apr/lebkow.html>     


## 237 of 332: Michael Brockington (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 23 07:55 

Via Email from Michael Brockington: 

A few thoughts prompted by comment <112>: "Write a monologue on the state of the world as it might be seen by Grouch Marx." 

The AI-generated mess of cliches generated by this prompt hangs together, but surely I'm not the only one to notice it contains nothing resembling humour: no wordplay, no wit, nary a joke.  So as far as channeling Groucho Marx goes, what a failure!  Which prompts me to speculate that humour may be a hard problem for AI -- wordplay particularly.  That sort of humour depends in large degree on creatively breaking the rules of language, while still making some kind of sense. I suspect Chat-GPT is much better at following rules than breaking them.  Maybe you can loosen off some parameter after you've trained it, but that seems more likely to produce non-sequiturs than jokes. 

I can foresee a sense of humour becoming the number one attribute for those on dating Apps, at least if you want to avoid being cat-fished by a chat-bot.  (Chat-fished?) 

Of course it's possible Chat-GPT has a great sense of humour, and just didn't know who Groucho Marx was, or was confused by the mispelling ('Grouch' with no 'o'.)  There's been some discussion of using this type of AI as an assistant, but what I've seen on the subject to date reminds me of some bad experiences.  Someone who pretends to understand you when they actually don't is the worst kind of assistant. 

I do think it's fair play to use Chat-GPT to write job applications, though, since some kind of AI is probably screening them at the other end of the pipe.  This seems to me the most benign use of this technology -- a loop of machines talking to machines, without disturbing the humans. 

I do wonder if some of the compulsion to argue on the internet will dissipate, as people become more aware of the likelihood they're talking to entities who have no mind to change.  I can imagine flame-wars disappearing into history -- although in such a case, various media companies would presumably program their AI commentators to dial up the rage-o-meter in order to re-engage mellowed-out users.     


## 238 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:19 

Thanks for that interesting set of thoughts, Michael. 

Word play in humor and word play in poems overlap in the way they ask you to pivot between two different meanings -- I've long thought that might make a good fMRI study. And both signal a kind of suppleness of mind that human beings appreciate in one another. Can an AI actually for real make a joke may be the next Turing test. (Good jokes are more widely recognizable than good poems are.)   

On the other hand, quite a few people are also less than gifted at making jokes.  

Even among insects-- some sing, some can't. 

 

--Issa, 18th c. haiku poet       


## 239 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:23 

  Well, I've got to climb on a plane for Italy presently, so I'm about done here at the WELLSoTW MMXIII.  The year's well under way. 

Got some evocative morsels to offer in parting. 

This has been quite a gloomy State of the Year, but here's a survey of professional news people in which they express fear that this year's news may be so unrelievedly awful that people won't be willing to read it and pay for it. 

https://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/journalism-media-and-technology-trends-and-predictions-2023 

So, you know, we're not extravagantly dark in our public assessments here. Of course you can ignore current events and stick your head deep in the sand, but you won't breathe any better for it.  

Personally, I'm by no means a stern, newshound realist, I'm actually a professional fantasist, but I plan to read quite a lot of news this year. More so than normally, even.     


## 240 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:24 



Here's an article about notorious antivax deniers and QAnon zealots dying of Covid. There's lots of 'em dead. More all the time. "Robert David Steele," you might have heard of him. 

https://news.yahoo.com/qanon-star-said-only-idiots-194553934.html 

 You might think: well!  How much ironic punishment can these QAnon eccentrics dish out to themselves?  Surely they'll catch on!  The actual trend will be the opposite: they'll find ways to valorize death by Covid as a glorious martyrdom, in rather a Christian-Science style.  Lifespans are dropping, and people are dying, not just out of general disease and misery, but like these people die: out of wounded pride, offended amour-propre, and even pure spite.     


## 241 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:25 



Expecting QAnon to wise up is like expecting a military rebellion from modern Russian troops,  in a Battleship Potemkin style.  Those rebellions do happen in Russia, but they happen because of insultingly bad food, not because they're Russians dying en masse.  The Russians don't much mind the dying, and they're in the societal avant-garde here.  In times of persistent pandemic, more people have their brusque Russian attitude than the squeamish one of trying to stay alive by whatever fussy means necessary. 

As Will and Ariel Durant used to declare about the crooked timber that is mankind: 

"Our capacity for fretting is endless, and no matter how many difficulties we surmount, how many ideals we realize, we shall always find an excuse for being magnificently miserable; there is a stealthy pleasure in rejecting mankind or the universe as unworthy of our approval." 

This is a moral vice of our era, this fatal pride that our magnificent assumptions are unfairly denied to us,  and it's something to look out for in one's self.  In the meantime, yeah, lots of sick people.     Evan and Katelyn, the amusing YouTube couple I was praising earlier, they both just announced on YouTube just got sick of Covid.  Best of health to them.  And to Toomas Ilves, who's still sick.  It's a serious disease and it's by no means in retreat.     


## 242 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:27 



Here's some last-ditch trendy AI stuff, because although I've been claiming, accurately I think, that "digital" is becoming stodgy and is not in command of current events, how can I not dote on this techie gossip? 

Here's some "AI plagiarism" where some hustler machine-rewrites news articles wholesale and then posts the results.  The resultant text-products have more or less the same news content as the original human-written articles, so why not read them?  Obviously entire novels and stories could be mulched in this way just as AI generators mulch art and photography.  If you liked "Finnegan's Wake," enjoy the new bowdlerized version in actual digitized English! 

We'll see plenty of AI abuse-potential stuff explored this year. This, and unheard-of neo-crimes and misdeeds, guaranteed. 

https://www.bigtechnology.com/p/a-writer-used-ai-to-plagiarize-me     


## 243 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:27 



Why not try the "new AI' as a more user-friendly lacquer over all the "old AI"?  Well, why not indeed?  Go ahead!  Bolt ChatGPT onto anything! 

https://writings.stephenwolfram.com/2023/01/wolframalpha-as-the-way-to-bring-computational-knowledge-superpowers-to-chatgpt/ 

Speaking of machine-learning AI, why not use Iranian face recognition to make sure that women are forced to wear their hijabs even when there are no men around?  That's patriarchal oppression "reified with a clunky intensity," as Adam Greenfield used to say about ubiquitous computing.  "Gosh that's terrible!"  Those cameras are all over the USA and EU and China, you're already sitting in that frying pan. 

https://www.wired.com/story/iran-says-face-recognition-will-id-women-breaking-hijab-laws/     


## 244 of 332: Bruce Sterling (bruces) Sat 14 Jan 23 10:29 

"My goodness, Mr Cyberpunk, your futurist prognostications sure are downbeat this year!" Yeah, that's true, but I dunno what to tell you, except that it makes me write funny sci-fi.  

I used to live in Belgrade in previous decades, a rather tough, trouble-hardened town with extensive grim historical experience, where I was basically a cheery Polyanna figure, this upbeat Yankee guy who used to smile all the time and methodically oil the door hinges.  I'm not there in Belgrade very often in this decade, so I felt like I could write a fantasy yarn that expressed my relationship to Belgrade existence. 

https://medium.com/@bruces/balkan-cosmology-by-bruce-sterling-2022-9a06b9b28bc0 

I wouldn't blame you if you think this yarn is pitch-black dystopianism, but I'm inclined to think it may be the funniest thing I ever wrote. I'm deeply impressed by my own wit here, even though, as science fiction, it's probably commercially useless.  Because, after a while, I got used to Belgrade.  I never "acculturated," but I kind of get it about them.  I'll probably live ten years longer because I hang out in Italy and Spain rather than Serbia, but I kinda miss 'em.   

That town has been leveled in repeated historic disasters about nineteen times (nobody's quite sure of the count), but they're still around no matter what, and in MMXXIII they've never looked so prosperous.  So instead of being an "exotic" or "dark" or "peculiar" place, it won't surprise me if, in a decade or so, people visit Belgrade and gaze around at the cultural sensibility there and just kinda nod. 

Why not a happy ending? The people like that! You could do a lot worse!     


## 245 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Sat 14 Jan 23 11:16 

Hi all - Sorry to have dropped abruptly out of the conversation - there was a family emergency. If anyone's still interested in chatting, I'll be here through Monday to assist in winding up this year's SOTW.     


## 246 of 332: Jane Hirshfield (jh) Sat 14 Jan 23 11:24 

Bruce to Italy, Jon to hip surgery, all of us into the future we go... 

 Thank you both, for once again hosting a rich and ranging conversation here. Thank you Bruce, for this last set of observations and links and naming what's around us. And for handing out the umbrella of the comic in bleak and dark weathers. 

Here's my hope for the next year: that we get some surprises to the good. That fevers of hatred begin to burn out, and also the virus. That technology incrementally or exponentially gives us some tools for improving the lives of both humans and our fellow inhabitants of the planet. That some gorgeous works of art come into being. That fewer go hungry, cold, thirsty, hot, are trapped by strictures, are holding breath against missiles. 

That common sense becomes more common and human hearts more forgiving and tender, more in love with existence and with one another.  

See you next year!     


## 247 of 332: Erik Josowitz (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 23 14:39 

My friend Erik Josowitz sent me a text message with the following: 

"ChatGPT writes business plans that can be hard to discern from real ones! [He attached a pdf of such a business plan, "Dynamic web3 Social Network."] What will happen to a16z if they have to spend all their time vetting proposals generated by their robot?" 

I asked him if I could share that message ... his response: 

"Of course. The prompt was 'ChatGPT, write a business plan for a new web3 business model where shareholders token values would be pegged to community participation'. A few tweaks asking it to add a section on technology and links/citations. It quickly got to a point where I couldn't easily tell if it was bullshit. 

"I think Ezra Klein's take on it - that it drops the marginal cost of producing bullshit to zero - is the real issue with ChatGPT and StableDiffusion/MidJourney."     


## 248 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Sat 14 Jan 23 14:39 

Thanks everyone for this year’s SOTW that I somehow found extra useful     


## 249 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 23 14:42 

I'll still be logging in here tomorrow but, as mentioned before, I'll be preoccupied Monday. However this topic isn't going anywhere, and others can feel free to keep posting.     


## 250 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Sat 14 Jan 23 14:46 

And incidentally, welcome back Emily and I hope the family emergency has resolved     


## 251 of 332: power meower (autumn) Sat 14 Jan 23 15:03 

I've enjoyed this topic. Thanks, all.     


## 252 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sat 14 Jan 23 15:07 

Yes - and it would be terrific if you (Emily) could post your thoughts about the state of journalism as we stumble into 2023...?     


## 253 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Sun 15 Jan 23 07:51 

Bruce posted his over and out yesterday, and this is my final post. 

Thanks to our guests, Sandy Stone and Emily Gertz. And we're sorry that Toomas Ilves couldn't make it. 

Thanks also to members of the WELL and readers off-WELL who contributed posts. This year's model of SOTW was rich, and will bear re-reading and re-thinking. 

Don't focus so much on the terrible that you miss the wonder-full. Invoking Dickens, it is the best of times and it is the worst of times. There's no utopia and there's no dystopia, there's always a struggle between our finest and our worst inclinations.  

Take some time to scan Maria Popova's "The Marginalian": <https://www.themarginalian.org/> 

"Nothing we see or hear is perfect. But right there in the imperfection is perfect reality." ~ Shunryu Suzuki     


## 254 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 09:18 

We do live in the age of Miracle and Wonder, but unless by "the best of times" you mean advanced technology, I can't see it. Neither is this the worst of times compared to some of what came before, and a lot of what seems increasingly inevitable. If we don't get seriously wholistic in the very near future, it looks from here/now like we are headed for hell in a bucket.  

We have soiled our own nest, and continue to add to the pile of excretion at an increasing rate. When will we ever learn?     


## 255 of 332: Axon (axon) Sun 15 Jan 23 09:44 

By any measure of wellbeing you choose to normalize and stack rank, these are the very best of times, by several lengths and gaining. 

If you can't find serenity in the midst of chaos, you'll have less serenity but the same amount of chaos. I'm told it's pronounced "cows".     


## 256 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 11:47 

The best of times for some humans maybe. For the rest of nature - not so much. There are also plenty of humans who are experiencing dramatic deterioration of their circumstances. Ukrainians, Haitians, Yemenis, Uighurs, Afghans, poor US residents, and anyone living in a low lying coastal area.  

We are in the midst of the greatest mass extinction event in millions of years. Certainly the greatest while H. Sapiens has been around. If we don’t stop despoiling the planet, the worst of times will be upon us in short order. I share Greta’s view. 

<https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=laeGR6j9u6c>     


## 257 of 332: @mackreed@mastodon.social (factoid) Sun 15 Jan 23 12:09 

Thank you to all the thinkers here for all the thoughts - and the education and inspiration and incitement they provoked.  

There's something deeply comforting and enlightening about having one's pessimism reinforced and almost filigreed at the same time one sees new information and insight grinding down its nastiest sharp edges.  

We are empowered to think and act with more clarity, even as it becomes clearer how completely f*cked it seems we all are.      


## 258 of 332: Axon (axon) Sun 15 Jan 23 12:32 

>for some humans maybe 

Twas ever thus. Notwithstanding, and taking the long view of history, wellbeing is more broadly enjoyed today than ever before. This is why fascism menaces so urgently; the maladaptive are running out of grievances to exploit. History will record this convulsion as an extinction burst. 

As for the climate, it portends great disequilibrium going forward, and its dynamics are ominous today. But the current overall status of the species remains an apex of progress. Less war, less violence, less poverty, less hunger, less autocracy, less injustice; more food, more prosperity, more education, more liberty. That's where we're at today. 

We may well be headed for perdition in an easter basket, but the current status is nevertheless encouraging. Whether we'll summon the will to address the climate challenge depends to a large degree on whether we'll stop exploiting, enslaving and killing each other over resources. On a global scale, that trend is encouraging. Whether it's in time is another conjecture. 

One may entertain concerns about the future of the environment and still acknowledge that in many ways, sapiens is adapting a more congenial brainstem. One fervently hopes that adaptation to address environmental conditions will follow with dispatch. But hope is just fear in a party dress.     


## 259 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 15 Jan 23 12:34 

Something that passes for good news these days? 

Ukraine credits local beavers for unwittingly bolstering its defenses — their dams make the ground marshy and impassable <https://www.businessinsider.com/ukraine-says-defenses-stronger-thanks-beavers-dams-2023-1> 

> Ukrainian officials had warned that Russia may wage an offensive through its ally Belarus into a region of Ukraine called Volyn.  

> Defense forces there, however, have been reassured by conditions on the ground, left impassable by miles of burst river banks, thick mud, and waterlogged fields. 

> The swampy conditions have given Ukrainians an advantage, and time to prepare: a local military unit called the Volyn territorial defense has been conducting daily training exercises in the area, according to Reuters. 

> Its spokesman, Serhiy Khominskyi, praised the beavers, which he told Reuters were more working unimpeded, unlike in other years.     


## 260 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 13:16 

>>>the current overall status of the species remains an apex of progress. 

If you call pollution and general environmental degradation progress. If you call a world where humans and their chattels are squeezing out everything else progress.  

<https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/land_mammals.png> 

I don’t see humans slowing down their creation of toxic waste or pollution of rivers and oceans anytime soon. I had hoped that the quieting of human activity(and the attendant effects) at the beginning of the pandemic shutdown might give first world people pause, and help move the needle away from consumerism. It hasn’t. There are only more seeking those first world “wonders” than ever before. The market for more electronic gadgets and crappy plastic goods is still growing, and anything like the current levels of production is well beyond what the planet can sustain. 

We really do have to stop measuring the health of the whole by how humans are doing. Imagine a patient in a hospital who is dying of metastatic cancer, and is also suffering from a broken leg. The bone surgeon looks at an X-ray and says “Excellent progress, you’ll be back on the tennis court in no time.” 

Like that. We’re killing the natural world. I can’t bring myself to call that progress.     


## 261 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 15 Jan 23 13:28 

I think entirely dismissing all benefits to humans is going a bit far in the other direction, though? And I'll point out that there some pretty significant natural sources of pollution, disaster, disease, and other suffering.     


## 262 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 15 Jan 23 13:32 

I consider a new Bruce Sterling story to read to be a bit of good news. I reposted the link in a couple places. Perhaps a few more people will see it.     


## 263 of 332: Axon (axon) Sun 15 Jan 23 13:33 

>I can’t bring myself to call that progress. 

If you ignore all the actual progress, then those adverse conditions could look pretty demoralizing. But overall, on balance and on a global scale, I see humanity evolving in promising dimensions. I guess it just depends on your data set, innit? 

I also see zero benefit in entertaining inevitable doom narratives. Cui bono? As I see it, we're not going to solve the practical logistical challenges of living nondestructively on the planet until we, as a species, move beyond reflexive tribal hostilities, and there's still rather a lot of runway to cover on that account. It's abundantly clear we're not going solve this to save ourselves.  

But we might do it to save everyone else.     


## 264 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Sun 15 Jan 23 14:10 

i'm with <yesway>. no surprise, i guess.     


## 265 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 15:24 

Pray do tell what data you’ve seen re: the actual progress towards a healthier environment for other species. What data have you seen that points towards a slowing of human degradation of the environment.  

>> I'll point out that there some pretty significant natural sources of pollution, disaster, disease, and other suffering. 

Can’t think of what natural phenomenon I’d characterize as pollution. At least not one that isn’t triggered by human activity. There’s no “waste” in nature. Certainly there are natural disasters that effect humans, but there’s no natural equivalent to burning fossil fuels, open pit mining, toxic agricultural runoff, systematic deforestation, or fracking. I literally don’t know what you mean.     


## 266 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Sun 15 Jan 23 15:53 

There is nothing, absolutely nothing, as important as climate collapse. The other issues mentioned - political divisions and reliance on tech - are important because they indicate there will never be large scale action on the issue because everyone is either busy blaming someone else or hoping someone else will magically fix things. We are fools, whistling as we walk past the graveyard while we brag that we've discovered penicillin.     


## 267 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Sun 15 Jan 23 16:39 



 we are funny, silly little creatures.      


## 268 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Sun 15 Jan 23 20:06 

On a human timescale, volcanic eruptions are a natural source of pollution [1]. Also forest fires. (Some are caused by people, but they’ve been happening long before we got here.) 

At geological timescales, there are also things like ice ages, asteroid hits and supernovas. Geological and biological changes have caused worse extinctions than anything we’ve come up with yet. 

Waste is a matter of perspective. Even the oxygen we breathe was a waste byproduct until life evolved that makes use of it. There will probably be lifeforms that evolve to make use of our byproducts, eventually. Sort of like we do with coal and oil. 

Eventually is a long time, though. This shouldn’t be considered an excuse for making things worse for ourselves on the timescales we care about. 

[1] <https://www.usgs.gov/programs/VHP/volcanic-gases-can-be-harmful-health-vegetation-and-infrastructure>     


## 269 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 21:15 

 <scribbled by yesway Sun 15 Jan 23 21:17>     


## 270 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Sun 15 Jan 23 21:17 

The current mass extinction is the only one to take place since the emergence of Homo sapiens. Waste is a human concept. It implies the existence of a byproduct that isn't useful to any part of nature. There is no natural equivalent of the toxic soup engendered by modern manufacturing, mining, and industrial agriculture. No other species ever engaged in activities that despoiled entire environments thousands of miles away.  

Yes there are volcanos, tsunamis, and lightning started forest fires. Those aren't caused by a species, and they kind of hurt everyone equally. Human caused damage is qualitatively different, especially because we know we're doing damage, but we keep doing it because money. We have met the enemy and it is(indeed) us.     


## 271 of 332: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Sun 15 Jan 23 21:21 

I am also with yesway on this perspective.     


## 272 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 16 Jan 23 07:34 

Renshin, thanks for the kind inquiry. The emergency is resolved in a certain sense. My 97-year-old father is going to die soon, comfortable and well-cared for in a pleasant residence tended by people who like and love him, instead of in the ER or hospital room where he spent the first seven or eight days of the year. 

My thoughts on the uses and condition of journalism as we come into 2023 are scattered, under the circumstances. I did note Bruce's comment and link to some big thoughts from big news minds, worrying that people are so tired of negative news that it may mean a significant downturn in news revenues this year. 

"Could this be the year when publishers rethink their offer to address the twin challenges of news avoidance and disconnection – to offer more hope, inspiration, and utility?" 

I have a fundamental beef with this question, or more precisely that the Reuters Institute is presenting it like new one. Because there are scores of news entities - outlets, organizations, journalism faculty and students and more - who have been doing this relentlessly for years and years now.   

If the Reuters Institute wanted to take a dose of its own medicine, it could have instead explored into HOW people have been transforming news coverage and delivery to offer more hope, inspiration, utility, WHAT the status of some of those efforts are and WHERE they are or may be going in the coming year.     


## 273 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 16 Jan 23 07:45 

The Reuters Inst. piece also natters on at length about Twitter. While many, many journalists are unhappy with the possible collapse of Twitter as a useful watering hole - slash - reporting tool, I'm skeptical this is a foundational concern for the news industry.  

The article also highlights "format innovation: the shift to audio and video continues"... give me a fucking break. Is this a new version of the "pivot to video" or "podcast revolution" hype? It reminds me of past panics in which radio and then television were going destroy journalism. 

Imagine some nabob complaining in the late 1400s that Gutenberg's infernal printing press was wiping out the town crier sector, which was obviously the only good way to report the news.     


## 274 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 16 Jan 23 07:49 

Ok, now I need to check out of this hotel and go visit with my father for a while. So: to be continued. 

Also: The mattar paneer came out pretty good. I think my cumin seeds went stale, though, so it could have been more flavorful. Also, gave up on sauteeing in the Instant Pot, which wasn't getting hot enough, and cooked in a pot on the stove instead. The Instant Pot did a pretty good rush cooking job on some pear-mango-ginger chutney, though.     


## 275 of 332: Axon (axon) Mon 16 Jan 23 09:44 

>current mass extinction 

Interesting way to describe overpopulation.     


## 276 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 16 Jan 23 10:10 

wrt #272, agreed the reuters report read like something prepared by mckinsey 5-10 years ago...     


## 277 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Mon 16 Jan 23 10:56 

"The current rate of extinction of species is estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than natural background extinction rates,[9][10][11][12][13] and is increasing.[14]" 

<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holocene_extinction> 

The rate of extinction is a knock on of the overpopulation of humans and their chattels. The loss and despoiling of habitat due to human activity is what's causing this. This is clear, and commonly understood by environmental scientists. It isn't really arguable.  

The birds and bugs are disappearing. You can see it for yourself. The chief cause of death of perching birds is caused by a human introduced invasive species - house cats. #2 is window strikes. Populations of endemic species in the Amazon, and in places like Madagascar, are declining rapidly. Killing big elements in the environment leads to general degradation. This has been proven with the reintroduction of predators hunted to extinction in places like Yellowstone.  

How well humans are doing needs to be measured in terms of how well the whole planet is doing, not by how well people are faring on average. We are not the purpose of this planet. It hasn't got one. Believing that we matter most is what got us here. Time to let go of that delusion.     


## 278 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:06 

My town crier analogy wasn't a great one, in part because written news exists alongside audio and video. It's not going away. The other reason is that these days the closest equivalents to town criers seem to be the scammers, conspiracists and dirty tricksters - the Alex Joneses.  

Which does bring us to disinformation: one of 2023's existential crises for every layer of democratically-oriented societies generally, including their journalism sectors. If there was ever a period when top-down interventions were going to curb this problem, it's long over. People need to be inoculated from up, down and sideways now.  

For instance, the NYT recently reported on how Finnish schools are teaching children how to spot disinformation. I'll post the link below. 

We need to see stuff like this happening on a big scale in the United States - is our collage of education systems nimble enough to do that? Can it happen amid the current reactionary wave of book bans, moral panic about critical race theory, and white grievance?      


## 279 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:09 

Ooops - Here's that nasty NYT "gift link" to the story on "How Finland is Teaching a Generation to Spot Misinformation": 

https://www.nytimes.com/2023/01/10/world/europe/finland-misinformation-classes.html?unlocked_article_code=zdsaczeRhyCFZ6recyWenT0dVzxe5pxJQ_n-NwMSkX7pSw3GjHlsoODGEiVkSvVHsMMrjg5p55faEtrGPU0kbZKxh2ToYx8MsMaWx6HZVT5PbSpX4IpV_M0W89FEMMcrbATW-yy32IkbW2nndTFxaY9QE9pW_xepLemuYtUMAeRrsoMoDvVidEe7OTXDWf7BK3FvYsTv8HbB5Vz8oRunfUDrM0vygLdPsV5_PnvjlMrzVQWosWtJ6eBVyU0J-4Lp1LVndVGkFKcKA5vM_sBOw81NLmCpUPiW_FyRkpsu7pqLqvoX9z1MC1Vjw1tDWxl0FcxOjmLgIjBH7frnljSjZvezQlVkXY2-VGt42XM&smid=share-url     


## 280 of 332: Axon (axon) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:18 

>How well humans are doing needs to be measured in terms of how well the whole planet is doing 

And you're welcome to do so. As someone who measures progress in terms of suffering reduction, the trend is encouraging. But I'm not a self loathing hominid.     


## 281 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:31 

So you're back to "I'm OK. What are you complaining about?" That's the Loathsome One we all know!     


## 282 of 332: Axon (axon) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:34 

As for the planet, I doubt very seriously that we'll summon the will to take better care of it unless we first figure out how take better care of each other. We may just be too late. But we're not even going to do the lifting until we find a way to stop exploiting, enslaving, and killing one another over resources. We've made steady progress towards that end, however, and I find that deserves acknowledgement, if only because it encourages more of the same.  

If we can save the planet it will not be for ourselves, but for others. We have to start giving a shit about others (beyond clan and tribe) before that can happen. I rather expect we'll come up short, though.     


## 283 of 332: Axon (axon) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:42 

>So you're back to "I'm OK 

That'a not what I'm saying at all. I'm saying I use a different yardstick for measuring progress. Has nothing to do with me. It's a continuum from suffering to wellbeing. We, as a species, are enjoying more of the latter and less of the former than at any time in human history. 

I'm not unmindful of the climate crisis and its ominous potential to disrupt that wellbeing. But I'm not about to be scolded for celebrating a global reduction in cruelty, ignorance, and want. Nor for hoping that more compassion, wisdom and abundance for all will continue to manifest. I don't really see how that qualifies as loathsome. 

Nothing lasts.      


## 284 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Mon 16 Jan 23 11:48 

I guess the suffering of the "average" human is your measure. Is it okay with you if the cetaceans suffer? How about primates? Birds? Coral reefs? Ungulates? Amphibians? 

All are necessary to the health of the planet we depend on. Thinking otherwise is delusional. We don't live in nations. We live in watersheds. We don't need money. We need air, water and topsoil. Have you ever read any of Wendell Berry, Gary Snyder, E. O. Wilson, Aldo Leopold?  

There's a 20 year old young woman from Sweden who could explain it for you. Oh wait, she already has. You just need to listen. How we treat the rest of the planet, and how we treat each other are of a piece. There's not much point in trying to fix society so it can survive long enough to "enjoy" running out of air, water and topsoil.  

I am not self loathing. I treat other people with respect. I also respect the right of the rest of nature to exist, and think humanity suffers from the delusion that it has time for things like petty politics. We don't. That's Greta's point. She is correct. It's math.     


## 285 of 332: Axon (axon) Mon 16 Jan 23 12:21 

>humanity suffers from the delusion that it has time for things like petty politics 

I don't think it's realistic to expect a species sharing a brainstem with all creatures in phylum chordata, which will sacrifice the entire herd to preserve the specimen, to care very much about cetaceans, other primates, ungulates or amphibians until it adapts to care about other specimens.  

Humanity may not be the purpose of the planet, but it has evolved a forebrain, which will sacrifice the specimen (or at least the offspring of other specimens) to preserve the herd, or the tribe.  

Until it evolves a capacity to sacrifice its current comfort to preserve the species as a whole, I think expectations that it will summon the societal will to preserve all others are frankly fanciful. 

The good news -- and it *is* good news -- is that sapiens is presenting evidence of adapting a more integrative understanding of its place in the grand scheme of things, if tardily and incrementally. 

But this understanding is confined to the educated classes, which is why the increase in education is worth celebrating. It's really Maslovian; you can't really expect people to devote energies to preserving the planet if they haven't enough to eat, are trapped in brutal regimes, or are subject to random injustice without recourse. Thus it is meet that we should celebrate when these persistent defects in our societies yield to remedy. 

I lament the inevitable dislocation and disequilibrium the oncoming climate crisis will impose (and is imposing). But the survivors of same, if any, may finally be able to make the evolutionary pivot to a more holistic waking consciousness. Great leaps in adaptation tend to result from dramatic changes in environmental conditions, after all.     


## 286 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Mon 16 Jan 23 12:58 

Emily, it’s good to hear from you. Love to you and your dad and everyone else involved. So glad he’s out of the hospital     


## 287 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Mon 16 Jan 23 14:28 



good posts, too, emily, about news and where we stand now.  

earlier in this conversation, folks were talking about the AI Chat thingy that claims to be able to write. in the following post, i will hide what musician-writer Nick Cave has to say about that. great fun. 

Chat GBT. such a catchy name.      


## 288 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Mon 16 Jan 23 14:29 

 <hidden>     


## 289 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Mon 16 Jan 23 14:30 



if you are logging in via text interface/ssh , type  o 588 at the respond prompt to read the post above. 

if you're on the web, well.com, there should be some kind of "show entire response" text button.     


## 290 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 16 Jan 23 14:56 

That was an odd debate to end on. 

I expect there's not much disagreement on the facts? Although I quibbled about it not being the biggest mass extinction in earth's geological history, it's still an enormous mess. 

The debate isn't really about what to do about it; I don't see any practical plans being made or any specific calls to action. 

It seems to be a moral debate about how severely we should castigate ourselves? Or how depressed we should be? Is our reaction to the Dickens quote about "the best of times, the worst of times" that we need to create a time-series graph of good vs. bad and find the max and min? 

I see no necessary connection between that theoretical exercise and anybody's morale. Being optimistic (or not), as a way of approaching life's problems, seems fairly independent of how good or bad things are in some universal, objective sense. 

Looking at things from a cosmic perspective is a nihilist trap [1], a way of convincing yourself that everything you do is meaningless. A global perspective can be similarly paralyzing. The world is very big and you are small in comparison. It's the wrong scale for individual humans to act on. It's emotionally healthier to pick on problems closer to your own size. 

The state of the world can be interesting to talk about sometimes, even though at that scale, we are mostly observers. We observe a lot more than we can do anything about. 

[1] https://meaningness.com/no-cosmic-meaning 

 
##  291 of 332: Patrick Lichty (plichty) Mon 16 Jan 23 17:24 

I'm sorry I was gone for about a week and this is my over and out. In many ways, it seems like the state of the world is about "too much ism", and how do we address that because, honesty, it's burning our world out. Artists are excited about. Feeling the world with trillions of images that may not have any meaning, originality, or whatever… And no one wants to even deal with the grill in the room regarding overpopulation. 

I think Greta Thunberg gets it right; either we're going to have to make the decision to be responsible for ourselves, or the responsibility will be taken for us in the terms of a homeostatic system, it's a simple as that. 

I think a good metaphor to this was that in 2020 I was attending a seminar at the Rem Koolhaas-designed gallery, called Concrete in Dubai on "the notion of apocalypse". I picked up the mic, and mentioned how the book "silent spring" was written in the year I was born, and that it is very well and good in a place where we could probably do something about all the environmental ills happening in the world while we are eating our cucumber sandwiches and sipping our Chardonnay, but if people "like us ", which I was at the time, don't take the political will to demand change we will merely see an apocalypse rather than merely talk about one. 

I basically got a rather annoyed look from the room, and I got an "are, yes…" Sort of response. And then we ate our cucumber sandwiches and sipped our Chardonnay… Which is what this is all about. 

And, in general, what this is really about is that Sultan Al Jaber the head of the Abu Dhabi National Oil Corporation, who is stepping down to head COP28. Comments from the industry are of the sort, "well, we don't want changes to happen too quickly, because it would be too disruptive…" 

Well, to disturb my Chardonnay sipping friends again, things are pretty disrupted as they are and it may only be a question of when the disruption will be. 

We should get about it sooner than later. 

See you on @realityaugmented, and thanks again.,     


##  292 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Mon 16 Jan 23 18:06 

As Greta points out, it's math. Just sorting out something like inequality(fiscal, gender, racial - pick one) would take decades. We have one decade to seriously reduce our use of fossil fuels or the environment we depend on will change fundamentally, in which case we'll probably go completely tribal/feudal/Mad Max.  

If we wait until there are no more autocrats or war mongers to get our consumption down, those types will become the rule, rather than the exceptions. The angry young woman from Sweden has moved the needle on the discourse more effectively than almost anyone else. She didn't achieve that by painting a rosy picture. She did it by shaming others for their blah-blah-blah equivocating and misdirection.  

There will be plenty of time to make a more just World if we can avoid ruining the ecosphere. There will be no point in worrying about building that world if the seas and forests are dead. We don't matter more than other life forms. Hubris is our original sin. It got us here.     


##  293 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Mon 16 Jan 23 18:47 

Name-checking math is not math. I don't see why you're impressed by a hand-wavy rhetorical gesture. It's not even name-checking specific math. 

This is a hand-wavy rhetorical zone, so no math is expected. But someone could link to some relevant math if they really wanted.     


##  294 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Mon 16 Jan 23 20:40 

 to hell with math. bring on the guillotines!     


##  295 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Mon 16 Jan 23 21:00 

what she said     


##  296 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Mon 16 Jan 23 21:58 

And do it now!     


##  297 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 17 Jan 23 00:19 

It's the same math that Bill McKibben has been banging on about for 15 years now. We blew right past 350.     


##  298 of 332: @jonl@mastodon.wellperns.com (jonl) Tue 17 Jan 23 02:12 

Some years ago I would’ve been doomed to spend my last years experiencing crippling and painful arthritis. However just hours ago a surgeon removed and replaced my bone-on-bone arthritic hip joint. Despite the terrible, there are still miracles. 


##  299 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 17 Jan 23 03:06 

Greta Thunberg didn't "name-check math". She used new words to say "reality bats last" and to point out that the relevant aspects of reality are not hidden from us.     


##  300 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Tue 17 Jan 23 08:31 

"Despite the terrible, there are still miracles."  

I agree with Jon on this. The human tendency is to foreground the negative and discount the positive  – which is a significant factor in why news outlets to do the same, just saying.  

It's an innate survival strategy that isn't serving many of us well in the present. 

What I think, though, is that we're at the peak of a roughly 125-year-old struggle to transform human systems (more or less globally) from a Western-worldview driven Business As Usual, into systems that are on the whole more just and healing – conflating a whole bunch of positive outcomes for biodiversity and climate, decolonization, and racial, gender, and class equity into "just." 

Since we're living in it, it can be hard to see that it's happening. Here's an example: 

Yes, an oil executive was just named leader of the world's largest annual climate change conference. It's so blatantly cynical and reprehensible that I wonder if the UNFCCC can survive it with any credibility intact. 

However:   The fossil fuel industry in the United States is the defendant in a half-dozen major lawsuits with states and the District of Columbia, for knowingly selling a dangerous product, at the same time the industry knew it would lead to catastrophic climate change, and lying to the public about those dangers.  

These lawsuits may do to the fossil fuel sector what the lawsuits against Big Tobacco for lying to the public did to the tobacco industry. 

In the past, Big Oil has usually succeeded in shifting lawsuits for climate harms from municipal or state courts to federal courts, which them dismissed them for varied legal reasons. 

With these consumer fraud suits, however, federal judges have consistently been sending them back to the state courts. 


##  301 of 332: Emily Gertz (emilyg) Tue 17 Jan 23 08:42 

These lawsuits may not sound like much on their own, especially given the scope of the injuries that need healing. But start looking for it, and we can find examples of this struggle in progress all around – and the question of which side will prevail (however imperfectly) is very open.     


##  302 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 17 Jan 23 09:18 

"Reality bats last" is only a slight improvement as handwaving goes. It's a gesture towards making a prediction without actually doing it. Fill it in from context. Similar to "I will be proven right in the end."     


##  303 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 17 Jan 23 10:11 

I agree with 298. See 254. 

I also agree with 300. Thanks Emily, and I hope your father can be kept comfortable until his time comes. I like hearing about people actually addressing the Big Problem. It is the most pressing matter requiring our collective attention. Wars contribute to the problem(and distract from addressing it), but they do end, and the need to address the eco crisis won't. 

"Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn't go away." - PKD 

Dismissing the validity of the science around climate change as hand waving, simply because we don't want to clutter these posts with cites from the last 40+ years is a tactic. It's not an assertion. Exxon knew this shit in the 70s, and kept it to themselves. The facts aren't in dispute, only what to do and when.     


##  304 of 332: Axon (axon) Tue 17 Jan 23 11:22 

Dismissing the rhetoric around climate change is not the same thing as dismissing the science.     


##  305 of 332: Gary Gach (ggg) Tue 17 Jan 23 12:51 

The science of atmospheric warming can be dated back to Antony van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723)     


##  306 of 332: Virtual Sea Monkey (karish) Tue 17 Jan 23 13:22 

Thunberg's message is that her audience all understand the science of global warming, they know what needs to be done and when it needs to be done, and they know that they're not doing it. She is calling the question. That's not hand-waving.     


##  307 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Tue 17 Jan 23 15:16 

Nature bats last.     


##  308 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 17 Jan 23 18:02 

An example of her foolish hand waving, and hyperbolic rhetoric. 

<https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=U72xkMz6Pxk>     


##  309 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 17 Jan 23 18:39 

I don't object to preaching to the choir due to being from a different church. I'm on the same side. But when people use stale, generic slogans in a conversation as if they're supposed to be persuasive, I don't feel like saying "amen" and it's hard to resist the impulse to poke at them. If I wanted to convince a skeptic of anything in particular related to climate change, I wouldn't use them. There's no learning going on and nothing to be curious about. We might as well share memes, since at least they can be funny.     


##  310 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Tue 17 Jan 23 20:19 

I find this conflict rather bizarre. I don't know very much about Thunberg and have nothing against her. But why is anyone supposed to find an argument more compelling because a young celebrity said it very sincerely? I'm sorry I inadvertently insulted your saint, that wasn't my intention.     


##  311 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Tue 17 Jan 23 21:59 

The point is that she's twenty, has an excellent understanding of the crisis, and doesn't give fuck one about whether anyone is made uncomfortable by having to hear it. "I want you to panic". She doesn't say that gratuitously. She means it.  

This SOTW exercise dwelled on lots of things that are interesting, but will become more and more extraneous when the economy and the environment completely collapse because we didn't overthrow the leeches who insist on constant economic growth as the only pertinent model. Hoping we'll pull it out of the nose dive dive with some elusive tech solution is a deadly delusion. We need less tech(which equals more polluting mining and manufacturing), and we need to stop selling consumerism.  

The belief that how we live now is okay is a delusion. The necessary shift in values and focus is even fought against in this forum. The house is on fire. No time to talk about who should drop whatever they're doing and work to save the biosphere. It's not preaching to the choir, it's rallying the troops. It is apparently necessary.     


##  312 of 332: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Tue 17 Jan 23 22:30 

I can't imagine how you define her as a 'celebrity'.     


##  313 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 18 Jan 23 08:29 

When she was 15 she hacked the global media with a piece of cardboard and a Sharpie. She brought intensity and clarity to the discourse, and eclipsed the blather from the monied interests with clear, simply stated truths. She is doing something about the biggest problem the world faces, which is more than the vast majority of adults can claim.  

She could make a ton of money if she wanted to, but instead denies herself the luxuries that might afford. She is, in fact, pretty much beyond reproach.  

Waving off the concerns she expresses as being less crucial than she's making them out to be is a mistake. The climate/biosphere crisis is the most pressing matter facing humankind. Everything else is tertiary at best.     


##  314 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Wed 18 Jan 23 09:49 

By 'celebrity' I mean someone who is famous. I didn't mean to discuss her and regret my part in making the conversation about her.     


##  315 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Wed 18 Jan 23 12:44 

Clearly some of us here are feeling the stress of climate collapse more than others, and since I’m in that camp, I am so grateful that anyone is doing anything, and therefore I adore Greta Thunberg     


##  316 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Wed 18 Jan 23 15:34 

Moi aussi.     


##  317 of 332: Tiffany Lee Brown / Burning Tarot (magdalen) Wed 18 Jan 23 16:16 

maybe i don't adore her, but i'm glad she's rallying the troops. i can't even rally myself and my own family -- to magically find, like, and live an entirely new lifestyle. funny how difficult that can be.     


##  318 of 332: Jennifer Powell (jnfr) Wed 18 Jan 23 18:40 

Because so much of it is structural not simply personal. 


##  319 of 332: William F. Stockton (yesway) Wed 18 Jan 23 19:28 

Calling us the troops is sort of fitting. The effort must be akin to a "wartime footing", All Hands On Deck and that sort of thing.     


##  320 of 332: Paulina Borsook (loris) Thu 19 Jan 23 09:37 

recall jimmy carter evoking william james, and the moral equivalent of war?     


##  321 of 332: Mark McDonough (mcdee) Thu 19 Jan 23 09:39 

MEOW!     


##  322 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 10:51 

Kids need role models, someone who can state a specific thing that will help, not just “do something.”  She is a celebrity because social media makes young girls celebrities to be picked apart. Sharpies aren’t good for the environment either.  And kids have been skipping school because it’s bullshit since forever.  The scientists with all the evidence did go to school, and did climb through the established ranks.  Are we doing a full platonian full circle, where we say science isn’t worth all the plastic waste and manufacturing? If it is a war on tech, is this conference the enemy? 

Only saying this because it has already been established that I say things that are not true and also worrisome.     


##  323 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 10:58 

Is it too terrible to add that I too don’t get paid to want to live in a world where all signs don’t point to death and would like to be a hero for it. 

I don’t think Greta wanted to be a celebrity.  I think she wanted to grow up without being bombarded with info that the world was ending. That’s the problem with social media. Nobody gets what they want.     


##  324 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 11:06 

There once was a girl who dreamed of being an inspirational artist, who found the whole world was inspiring and one big beautiful artwork and then everyone with money told her to stop or fuck off. https://youtu.be/AR8-zt4Yt8A 

The algorithms and coorporations pick and choose who think about and who you will die for.  She wants us to panic because that is how she feels when schools serve no purpose but to inspire panic, though everyone should know you learn 20 times faster through play.  And you can’t even invent without waste, yet everyone with financial sway gets to argue about whose new car is more efficient.  More efficient at driving us crazy am I right?     


##  325 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 11:11 

Again just putting in my two cents because it’s been established that I am full of shit.  That is the state of the world. Everyone’s a fair game celebrity to be eaten alive. The ones in the shadows thrive on it.  Though it’s hard to put this forward as any fathomable kind of plan, it also wouldn’t surprise anyone.  In fact, they are praying for a big reveal.     


##  326 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 11:11 

Going back to my lane now     


##  327 of 332: Renshin Bunce (renshin) Thu 19 Jan 23 11:24 

Rebecca Solnit has a long piece in The Guardian cautioning against despair and urging a reframe of the narrative around climate change: 

"Every crisis is in part a storytelling crisis. This is as true of climate chaos as anything else. We are hemmed in by stories that prevent us from seeing, or believing in, or acting on the possibilities for change. Some are habits of mind, some are industry propaganda. Sometimes, the situation has changed but the stories haven’t, and people follow the old versions, like outdated maps, into dead ends. 

We need to leave the age of fossil fuel behind, swiftly and decisively. But what drives our machines won’t change until we change what drives our ideas. The visionary organiser adrienne maree brown wrote not long ago that there is an element of science fiction in climate action: “We are shaping the future we long for and have not yet experienced. I believe that we are in an imagination battle.” 

In order to do what the climate crisis demands of us, we have to find stories of a livable future, stories of popular power, stories that motivate people to do what it takes to make the world we need. Perhaps we also need to become better critics and listeners, more careful about what we take in and who’s telling it, and what we believe and repeat, because stories can give power – or they can take it away. 

To change our relationship to the physical world – to end an era of profligate consumption by the few that has consequences for the many – means changing how we think about pretty much everything: wealth, power, joy, time, space, nature, value, what constitutes a good life, what matters, how change itself happens. As the climate journalist Mary Heglar writes, we are not short on innovation. “We’ve got loads of ideas for solar panels and microgrids. While we have all of these pieces, we don’t have a picture of how they come together to build a new world. For too long, the climate fight has been limited to scientists and policy experts. While we need their skills, we also need so much more. When I survey the field, it’s clear that what we desperately need is more artists.” 

What the climate crisis is, what we can do about it, and what kind of a world we can have is all about what stories we tell and whose stories are heard." 

https://www.theguardian.com/news/2023/jan/12/rebecca-solnit-climate-crisis-popular-imagination-why-we-need-new-stories     


##  328 of 332: Hanna Kovenock (hakoveno) Thu 19 Jan 23 12:51 

Thank you for framing my rant so generously.     


##  329 of 332: Bert Stammerjohan (bstamerjon) Thu 19 Jan 23 13:05 

Daniel Quinn talked on this subject in Ishmael and other books. There came a point where one culture of humanity decided to conquer and rule the earth as if we were the end point of evolution. We are of that culture. Until we stop living this way, disaster looms. 


##  330 of 332: Brian Slesinsky (bslesins) Thu 19 Jan 23 16:45 

Here’s an off-Well response to <4> 

The Permaweird There is no polycrisis, only nostalgia for an imagined present <https://studio.ribbonfarm.com/p/the-permaweird> 

> Unlike Bruce, I’m not surprised. This continuity and mutation into “long-term shambolic debacles” (though I would challenge the “debacle” part) is precisely what I’ve been going on about with my notion of the Permaweird. Arguably, once you’re in a regime of long-term shambolic evolution, you can’t really think of it as a crisis at all. 

> The Permaweird leaves us in a perennial state of frustrated urgency; a cortisol-saturated state of being with nothing to do and nowhere to go. And the longer it persists, the more we begin to harbor the growing suspicion that perhaps there is no crisis as such. That for the most part, despite the snowballing weirdness, there is nothing in the circumstances for which a literal crisis response, in a biochemical fight-or-flight sense, is appropriate, either at an individual or collective level. 

> Things like climate change and the culture war are not even crises in a figurative sense. They are phenomena that exist on social scales we are simply not used to inhabiting at all, in crisis mode or otherwise. Our intuitions and frames from smaller scales do not apply. 

The scale issue rings true to me. I’m more comfortable thinking about water shortages in the American West than about global warming. Although that’s already an enormous scale and it’s politically very difficult, I can imagine what adjustments need to be made. One victory condition would be some kind of messy compromise among the states that get water from the Colorado river basin. It might happen at the last minute, but it will have to happen when the water starts getting cut off seasonally. It doesn’t seem religious. 

I’m not sure what to think when activists block coal mining in Lützerath, Germany. In human, local terms, they are blocking huge machines from doing enormous damage to the land. (The residents have been bought out and left already.) But it’s unclear what the stakes are for the world? Germany is apparently already getting out of coal mining, though it’s been delayed. There were plans to destroy five other villages that have been scrapped. 

In one sense, the Greens have already won there, and this is just a mopping up exercise, one final battle and the expansion of coal mining is over there, regardless of which side wins. In another sense, it probably doesn’t really make a dent in CO2 emissions because German coal plants will still need to burn coal from somewhere else. So it seems like a real, concrete action of stopping enormous machines has been made symbolic? 

Other calls to action that people make about global warming are often extremely vague. “We must stop living this way” doesn’t have an action plan associated with it. The things we can do personally often seem only symbolically connected to climate change, sort of like pressing a “walk” button that’s been disabled.     


##  331 of 332: Howard Rheingold (hlr) Mon 23 Jan 23 16:27 

Bruce mentioned Robert David Steele, the Q-anon, anti-vaxxer, ex-CIA guy who died of Covid, denying it to the end. 

In the early 1990s, when I was editor of Whole Earth Review, he proposed and I commissioned an article on what he was calling "open source intelligence." He later invited Barlow and me to speak to intelligence people about the idea. I visited his house. He lived in Langley, not far from HQ. His wife was also CIA. He said she was in the drugs division. I was too polite to ask if it was the part that interdicted drugs or the part that sold drugs. His den had pictures on the wall of him with what looked like teenagers in some Central American country, holding machine guns. 

He visited me a couple times. I took him to breakfast, where he drank 3 glasses of wine at 9 AM.  

Then I didn't hear from him for decades. About 3 or 4 years ago, he showed up. He and I and former Wellite Are We Really took a walk. During the walk, Really and I exchanged wide-eyed glances as Steele went on about his elaborate anti-semitic conspiracy theories. 

Eek. 

Then I heard about his death.     


##  332 of 332: Michael Brockington (jonl) Tue 24 Jan 23 14:38 

(Via email from Michael Brockington - posted late, originally received January 15) 

Thank-you, everyone, for an ever-stimulating start to the year. 

As a post-script, I thought an experimental investigation of Chat-GPT's sense of humour might be worthwhile.  I can report that comedians (and poets?) have little to fear for now.  Humour is subjective, of course, but these results could at best be characterized as lame.  They bear some statistical resemblance to humour, without actually being funny.  On a par with dad-jokes, perhaps? 

Note also that a google search turns up some of these jokes verbatim... 

The dismal results: 

>>Tell me a joke about iguanas Why did the iguana break up with his girlfriend? Because she was always too cold-blooded for him. 

>>make a pun about bananas Why did the banana go to the doctor? Because it wasn't peeling well. [plagiarized verbatim from the internet] 

>>demonstrate wordplay about the cold war Why did the Soviet Union and the United States have a cold war? Because they were too chilly to warm up to each other. 

>>tell me a joke about an onion and a drainpipe Why did the onion go to the drainpipe? To get a little privacy while it cried. 

>>make a joke Why don't scientists trust atoms? Because they make up everything. [plagiarized verbatim from the internet] 

>>demonstrate witty repartee about dishes Person 1: "I can't believe I have to do dishes again, it's such a chore." Person 2: "I guess you could say it's a plate full of trouble." Person 1: "Ha, at least it will be a clean slate when we're done." Person 2: "Yeah, but it's a lot of work to get to that point, it's a real grind." 

>>make a joke about death I'm sorry, but making a joke about death may be considered offensive or insensitive to some people. It's important to be respectful and considerate of others' feelings and beliefs. Is there anything else I could help you with? 

 Further investigation is required, to see how chat-GPT copes with heckling. 
 